RESEARCH ARTICLE

# Real-Time Control of an Articulatory-Based Speech Synthesizer for Brain Computer Interfaces

[Figure 2]

a11111

[Figure 3]

OPEN ACCESS

Citation: Bocquelet F, Hueber T, Girin L, Savariaux C, Yvert B (2016) Real-Time Control of an Articulatory-Based Speech Synthesizer for Brain Computer Interfaces. PLoS Comput Biol 12(11): e1005119. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119

Editor: Gabriel Mindlin, University of Buenos Aires, ARGENTINA

Received: February 4, 2016 Accepted: August 25, 2016 Published: November 23, 2016 Copyright: © 2016 Bocquelet et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Data Availability Statement: The BY2014 articulatory-acoustic dataset is available for download at https://zenodo.org/record/154083 (doi: 10.5281/zenodo.154083). Funding: This work was supported by the Fondation pour la Recherche Me´dicale and by the French Research Agency (ANR) under the Brainspeak project (www.frm.org) under grant No DBS20140930785. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

##### Florent Bocquelet1,2,3,4, Thomas Hueber3,4, Laurent Girin4,5, Christophe Savariaux3,4, Blaise Yvert1,2*

1 INSERM, BrainTech Laboratory U1205, Grenoble, France, 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, BrainTech Laboratory U1205, Grenoble, France, 3 CNRS, GIPSA-Lab, Saint-Martin-d’Hères, France, 4 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, GIPSA-Lab, Saint-Martin-d’Hères, France, 5 INRIA Grenoble Rhoˆne-Alpes, Montbonnot, France

* blaise.yvert@inserm.fr (BY)

## Abstract

Restoring natural speech in paralyzed and aphasic people could be achieved using a Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) controlling a speech synthesizer in real-time. To reach this goal, a prerequisite is to develop a speech synthesizer producing intelligible speech in realtime with a reasonable number of control parameters. We present here an articulatorybased speech synthesizer that can be controlled in real-time for future BCI applications. This synthesizer converts movements of the main speech articulators (tongue, jaw, velum, and lips) into intelligible speech. The articulatory-to-acoustic mapping is performed using a deep neural network (DNN) trained on electromagnetic articulography (EMA) data recorded on a reference speaker synchronously with the produced speech signal. This DNN is then used in both offline and online modes to map the position of sensors glued on different speech articulators into acoustic parameters that are further converted into an audio signal using a vocoder. In offline mode, highly intelligible speech could be obtained as assessed by perceptual evaluation performed by 12 listeners. Then, to anticipate future BCI applications, we further assessed the real-time control of the synthesizer by both the reference speaker and new speakers, in a closed-loop paradigm using EMA data recorded in real time. A short calibration period was used to compensate for differences in sensor positions and articulatory differences between new speakers and the reference speaker. We found that real-time synthesis of vowels and consonants was possible with good intelligibility. In conclusion, these results open to future speech BCI applications using such articulatorybased speech synthesizer.

#### Author Summary

Speech Brain-Computer-Interfaces may restore communication for people with severe paralysis by decodingcortical speech activity to control in real time a speech synthesizer. Recent data indicate that the speech motor cortex houses a detailedtopographical

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

representation of the different speech articulators of the vocal tract. Its activity could thus be used in a speech BCI paradigm to control an articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer. To date, there has been no report of an articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer producing fully intelligible speech, as well as no evidencethat such device could be controlled in real time by a naive subject. Here, we present an articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer and show that it could be controlled in real time by several subjects articulatingsilently to produce intelligible speech.

### Introduction

In the past decades,brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have beendevelopedin order to restore capabilities of people with severe paralysis, such as tetraplegia or locked-insyndrome. The movements of different effectors,like a computer mouse or a robotic arm, were successfullycontrolled in severalBCI studies, with increasing precision [1–9]. In the case of severe paralysis including aphasia (e.g.,locked-insyndrome), ways of communicating can be provided by BCIapproaches, mostly through a letter selectionor typing process [1,10,11]. However, speech remains our most natural and efficientway of communication. BCIapproaches could thus also be applied to control a parametric speech synthesizer in real-time in order to restore communication by decoding neural activity from speech processing brain areas [12,13]. Such perspectiveis indeedsupported by an increasing number of studies reportingencouragingperformancesin decodingspeech utterances, including phones, words or even full sentences, from brain activity [14–21].

Severalbrain areas are involved in speech processing, forming a wide cortical network, classically modeled by a ventral and a dorsal stream [22,23]. Becausethis speech network is widely distributed, a choice needs to be made on the corticalareas where to extract and decodesignals for a speech BCI. One possibility is to probe signals from auditory areas, which encode the spectro-temporalrepresentation of speech. However, auditory areas are widely involved in the sensoryperception and integration of all sounds a person is exposedto, including speech and non-speech environmental sounds. For this reason, probing neural activity in areas more specifically dedicated to speech production might be more relevant for conversational speech production with BCI.It should be noted that although aphasia caused by strokes very often affect the articulatoryspeech motor cortex or other cortical areas necessaryfor speech production, this is not the case for other types of aphasia, such as in locked-inpatients or patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, for whom corticalspeech activity can be intact or largely conservedand thus exploitable in a BCI perspective.In such case, and if successful,continuous speech restoration would be more beneficialthan an indirect communication scheme such as a letter selectionprocess.

Previous anatomical and functionaldata indicate that the speech sensorimotor cortex exhibits a somatotopic organization mapping the different articulators involved in speech production [24–28], the detaileddynamics of which can be highlightedusing high-density neural recording [21]. Interestingly, it was furthershowed recently that during speech production, the activity of the speech sensorimotor cortex is rather tuned to the articulatoryproperties of the produced sounds than to their acoustic properties [29]. While neural data could be decoded directly into acoustic parameters, these data thus support our hypothesis that a relevant strategy could be to consider a more “indirect” approach accounting for the articulatoryactivity of the vocal tract under control of the speech sensorimotor cortex to produce sounds. In such approach, corticalsignals will be probed and decodedto control in real time a parametric articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer having enough degrees of freedom to ensure continuous

intelligible speech production. Interestingly, these articulatoryfeatures are generally considered lower dimensional and varying more slowly in time than acoustic features, thus possibly easier to predict from corticalsignals.

Articulatory-basedspeech synthesizers are able to generate an intelligible speech audio signal from the position of the main speech articulators: tongue, lips, velum, jaw, and larynx [30– 36]. Articulatory-basedsynthesizers are mainly divided into two categories: physical or geometricalapproaches (such as in [36–39]), which aim to model the geometryof the vocal tract and its physical properties, and machine-learning approaches (such as [34,35]), which use large databases to automatically learn the mathematical relationship betweenarticulatoryand acoustic data. Here we made the choice to build a synthesizer using a machine-learning approach. Indeed, to synthesize speech, geometricaland physical models must first solve the difficultinverse problem of recovering articulatoryparameters from the acoustic of each calibration sequence.By contrast, with machine-learningapproaches, a large articulatory-acoustic database must be recorded, thus avoiding this issue for all the sentences of this database. For BCI applications, one will require a parallel dataset of brain signals and control parameters for the synthesizer:here we can use known data from the articulatory-acousticdatabase. Moreover, geometricaland physical models need high computation power while, once trained, a machine-learningmodel is very fast to apply for real-time synthesis. Finally, we showed in a previous study that such machine-learningapproach is robust to noisy input parameters [35], which is a non-negligibleasset for BCI applications, when the decodingof neural data results in non-perfectsignals.

Interestingly, articulatory-basedsynthesizers can be controlled with about 10 continuous parameters [35,40], which is of the order of the number of degrees of freedomcontrolled simultaneously in recent complex motor BCI paradigms in monkeys [41] and human participants [9,42].

However, it remains unknown whether a given articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer built from articulatory-acousticdata obtained in one particularreference speaker can be controlled in real time by any other speaker to produce intelligible speech.In this context, we present here an articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer producing intelligible speech that can be controlled in real time for future BCI applications. This synthesizer is basedon a machine-learningapproach in which the articulatorydata recorded by electro-magneticarticulography (EMA) is converted into acoustic speech signals using deep neural networks (DNNs). We show that intelligible speech could be obtained in a closed-loopparadigmby different subjectscontrolling this synthesizer in real time from EMA recordings while articulatingsilently, i.e. without vocalizing.Such a silent speech condition is as close as possible to a speech BCIparadigm where the synthetic voice replaces the actual subject voice. These results thus pave the way toward a future use of such articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer controlled by neural activity in a speech BCIparadigm.

### Materials and Methods Ethics Statement

All subjects gave their informed consent to participate in the study, which was approved by the local ethical committee of Grenoble for non-interventional research (CERNI) under approval No. 2016-01-05-82.

#### Subjects

Four French native speakers (1 female, 3 males) participated in the study. One male subject was the reference speaker from whom data the synthesizer was built, and all four subjects then controlled in real time the synthesizer.

#### Construction of an articulatory-based speech synthesizer

In a first step, we designedan intelligible articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer converting the trajectoriesof the main speech articulators (tongue, lips, jaw, and velum) into speech (see Fig

- 1). For this purpose,we first built a large articulatory-acousticdatabase, in which articulatory data from a native French male speaker was recorded synchronously with the produced audio speech signal. Then computational models based on DNNs were trained on these data to transform articulatorysignals into acoustic speech signals (i.e. articulatory-to-acousticmapping). When considering articulatorysynthesis using physical or geometricalmodels, the articulatory data obtained by EMA can be mapped to the geometricalparameters of the model [39]. Here we consider a machine-learningapproach in which the articulatorydata obtained by EMA is directly mapped to the acoustic parameters of a vocoder.

Articulatorydata acquisition and parameterization. The articulatorydata was recorded using the electromagneticarticulography (EMA) NDI Wave system (NDI, Ontario, Canada), which allows three-dimensionaltracking of the position of small coils with a precision of less than a millimeter. Nine such 3D coils were glued on the tongue tip, dorsum, and back, as well as on the upper lip, the lower lip, the left and right lip corners, the jaw and the soft palate (Fig

- 2A). This configuration was chosen for being similar to the ones used in the main publicly available databases, such as MOCHA (http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/research/projects/artic/mocha. html) and mngu0 [43], and in other studies in articulatory-basedsynthesis [34] or articulatoryto-acoustic inversion [44]. This configuration allows to capture well the movements of the main articulators while avoiding to perturbthe speaker too much: 3 coils on the tongue give information on back, dorsum and apex while 4 coils on lips give information on protrusion and rounding, and we considered that one sensor was enough for the jaw since it is a rigidarticulator, and one for the soft palate since it has mostly one degree of freedom.An additional 6D reference coil (which position and orientation can be measured) was used to account for head movements and was glued behind the right ear of the subject. To avoid coil detachment due to salivation, two precautions were taken to glue the sensors. First, the tongue and soft palate sensors were glued onto small pieces of silk in order to increase contact surface, and second, the tongue, soft palate and jaw surfaces were carefully dried using cottons soaked with 55% green Chartreuseliquor. The recorded sequences of articulatorycoordinates were down-sampled from 400 Hz to 100 Hz.

Finally, in order to assess the effectof the number of articulatoryparameters on the intelligibility of synthesized signals, four different parameterizations of the articulatorydata were used: using the raw 3D data of the 9 sensors (27 parameters), projecting the data in the midsagittal

[Figure 7]

- Fig 1. Articulatory-based speech synthesizer. Using a DNN, articulatory features of the reference speaker are mapped to acoustic features, which are then converted into an audible signal using the MLSA filter and an excitation signal.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g001

plane and removing the lip-corner sensors (14 parameters, see Fig 2B), and reducing the original data to either 10 or 7 parameters using principal component analysis (PCA).

Acoustic data acquisition, parameterizationand synthesis. The speech signal was recorded at 22,050 Hz synchronously with the articulatorydata. Its spectralcontent was parameterizedby 25 mel-cepstrum(MEL) coefficients(Fig 2C) computed every10 ms (hence a 100 Hz sampling matching the articulatorydata acquisition frequency)from a 23-ms (512 samples) sliding window using the Speech Processing ToolKit (SPTK, http://sp-tk.sourceforge. net/) mcep tools [45]. These 25 coefficientsefficientlyrepresent the spectralenvelope of speech and can be converted back into audible sounds by building a so-calledMel Log Spectrum Approximation (MLSA) filter [46]. This approach is based on the source-filtermodel of speech production, which models the speech signal as a convolution of a sound source (e.g., the glottal activity) with a linear acoustic filter representing the vocal tract,. In the present MLSA model, a set of M mel-cepstrumcoefficientscα(m) represent the vocal tract filter H(z) for each audio signal window, as follows:

PM m¼0caðmÞ:~z m;

HðzÞ ¼ exp

z 1 a 1 az 1

with ~z 1 ¼

:

The coefficientα is chosen so that the mel-scale becomes a good approximation of the human sensitivity to the loudness of speech (here α = 0.455). The mel-cepstral coefficients cα(m) are approximated using the Newton-Raphson method for numerically solving equations, and linearly combined to obtain the MLSA filter coefficients.This filter is then excited with a source signal representing the glottal activity (i.e. vibration of the vocal folds). Such excitation signal is generally designedby extractingthe pitch from the original audio signal, and then

[Figure 9]

- Fig 2. Articulatory and acoustic data. A–Positioning of the sensors on the lip corners (1 & 3), upper lip (2), lower lip (4), tongue tip (5), tongue dorsum (6), tongue back (7) and velum (8). The jaw sensor was glued at the base of the incisive (not visible in this image). B–Articulatory signals and corresponding audio signal for the sentence “Annie s’ennuie loin de mes parents” (“Annie gets bored away from my parents”). For each sensor, the horizontal caudo-rostral X and below the vertical ventro-dorsal Y coordinates projected in the midsagittal plane are plotted. Dashed lines show the phone segmentation obtained by forced-alignment. C–Acoustic features (25 mel-cepstrum coefficients—MEL) and corresponding segmented audio signal for the same sentence as in B.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g002

generating white noise for non-voiced segments, and a train of pulses for voiced-segments,which periodvaries according to the pitch. However, since there is no such glottal activity in silent speech,we as well designedan artificialtemplate-based excitation signal using the glottal activity from a single vowel /a/. While such glottal activity could be recorded using an electroglottograph as in [47], here we estimated it using inverse filtering[48] (using the SPTK mlsadf tool). Using such an excitation signal results in an unnatural (‘‘robotic”) speech sound in which all the phonemes are voiced, and have the same pitch. Transcription of the audio signals was first done manually in naturally written text, then translated into phone sequencesusing LLiaPhon phonetizer (https://gna.org/projects/lliaphon) [49], and finally manually corrected.Phone sequences were then automatically alignedon audio files using a standard speech recognitionsystem (based on a set of tied-state context-dependent phonetic hidden Markov models (HMM) trained using the HTK toolkit http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/)) and a forced-alignment procedure.

Reference articulatory-acousticdatabase(the BY2014 corpus). For this specificstudy, we recorded a large articulatory-acousticdatabase, named BY2014, containing more than 45 minutes of speech after removing the periodsof silence. This database was composed of 712 items of variable length, ranging from isolated vowels, vowel-consonant-vowel sequences (VCVs), phonetically balanced sentences, and other sentences extracted from French newspaper “Le Monde”. This resulted in 18,828 phones in total. The distribution of the 34 different phonetic classes used to describeFrench language in this corpus is shown in Fig 3A. Phone frequency ranged from 1,420 occurrencesfor the phone /a/ to 27 occurrencesfor /η/. The distribution of the articulatorydata points in the midsagittal plane is represented in Fig 3B. The velum was the articulator with the smallest movement amplitude (less than 1cm), followed by the jaw and the upper lip (about 1cm), the lower lip (about 2cm), and finally the tongue had the highest amplitude of movement (about 3cm for each sensor). In the following, this dataset is referred to as the reference data, and the subject from whom this data was recorded is referred to as the reference speaker. This dataset is available for download at https://zenodo. org/record/154083 (doi: 10.5281/zenodo.154083).

Articulatory-to-acoustic mapping using Deep Neural Networks (DNN). The articulatory-to-acousticmapping was performedusing a deep neural network (DNN) trained on the reference data (see Fig 1). A DNN is an artificialneural network with more than one or two hidden layers, which can be used to address complex (and highly non-linear) classification and regression problems. More details can be found in [50]. The choice for using a DNN-based mapping was motivated by previous results [35,51] showing that such mapping was more robust to noisy input than a state-of-the-art mapping based on Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) such as the one proposed by Toda et al. [34], and thus likely a better candidate for future BCI applications where input articulatorycontrol signals will be inferred from noisy cortical signals.

Here, we considered a fully-connectedfeed-forwardDNN with 3 hidden layers containing 200 leaky rectifiedlinear units (LReLU), which are known to improve convergence of the training procedure and to lead to better solutions than conventional sigmoid units [52]. Each unit of a layer was connectedto all units of the next layer, and there was no connectionbetween units belonging to the same layer. Both input (articulatory)and output (acoustic) data were zscored (subtraction of the mean and then division by the standard deviation) before being fed to the network, and data frames corresponding to silence periodswere removed. To take into account the dynamic properties of speech, we concatenated each articulatoryframe with its 4 preceding frames (50-ms time window context compatible with a real-time implementation). The DNN thus mapped the articulatoryinput features to 25 output mel-cepstrumcoefficients, which were then converted into an audible speech signal using the MLSA filter and the excitation signal.

[Figure 12]

- Fig 3. Articulatory-acoustic database description. A–Occurrence histogram of all phones of the articulatory-acoustic database. Each bar shows the number of occurrence of a specific phone in the whole corpus. B–Spatial distribution of all articulatory data points of the database (silences excluded) in the midsagittal plane. The positions of the 7 different sensors are plotted with different colors. The labeled positions correspond to the mean position for the 7 main French vowels.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g003

DNN training is usually a complex task since large initial weights typically lead to poor local minima, while small initial weights lead to small gradients making the training infeasible with many hidden layers [53]. Here, we trained our network using the classical back-propagation algorithm [54]. However, we chose to add the different layers successively. During the first step, the network was only composed of the input layer, the first hidden layer, and the output layer. This initial network was randomly initializedthen fine-tunedusing back-propagation. Then a new hidden layer was added and the output layer was replaced with a new one so that the new network was now composed by the input layer, the previously trained hidden layer, the new hidden layer, and the new output layer. The weights from the input layer to the first hidden layer were those obtained at the previous step and the other weights were randomly initialized.Back-propagation was then applied to this new network for fine-tuning.This process was repeated until all the hidden layers were added. At each step, the weights of a given layer

were randomly initializedusing a Gaussian distribution with a zero mean and a 1/N standard deviation, where N was the number of units of the previous layer. The error criterion was the mean squared error (MSE) betweenpredicted and expectedvalues:

PD i¼1ðoi miÞ2

MSE ¼

;

D

where oi is the i-th output of the network, D = 25 is the number of MEL outputs, and mi is the i-th z-scored MEL coefficientcomputed on the original audio data. The minimization of this error was done with the Polack-Ribière conjugate gradient method using 3 quadratic/cubic line searches [55], on successive batches: at each epoch, the training data samples were randomly shuffled and then divided into 100 blocks. Dividing into batches allowed more efficient computation than when using single samples [52]. The training was made by randomly selecting90% of the articulatory-acousticdatabase items, while half of the remaining 10% were used for early stopping of the training (the training was stopped when the error on this validation set did not improve over 20 epochs) and the other half for testing. The whole training was done using custom-made optimization tools written in C++, the conjugate gradient code being adapted from the Matlab implementation of the DRToolBox (http://lvdmaaten.github.io/drtoolbox/).Four different DNNs were trained, one for each of the four different parametrizations of the articulatory data (with 27, 14, 10 and 7 articulatoryparameters).

#### Real-time control of the articulatory-based speech synthesizer

In a second step, four speakers controlled the synthesizer in real time. As built, the synthesizer could only be used on the reference data and could not be directly controlled by another speaker or even by the same speaker in a different session. Indeed, from one session to another, sensors might not be placed at the exact same positions with the exact same orientation, or the number of sensors could change, or the speaker could be a new subject with a different vocal tract geometryand different ways of articulatingthe same sounds. In order to take into account these differences,it was necessaryto calibrate a mapping from the articulatoryspace of each new speaker (or the same reference speaker in a new session) to the articulatoryspace of the reference speaker, that is, an articulatory-to-articulatorymapping (Fig 4A and 4B, left blue part). To achieve this calibration, we acquired articulatorydata from the new speaker that corresponded to known reference articulatorydata. This calibration model was then applied in real time to incoming articulatorytrajectoriesof each silent speaker to produce continuous input to the speech synthesizer. Since the subjects were in silent speech and thus no glottal activity was available, we chose to perform the synthesis using the fixed-pitch template-based excitation, and in order to reduce the number of control parameters, we chose the synthesis model using 14 articulatoryparameters since results showed that it was able to produce fully intelligible speech (see first part of the Results section).Fig 4C summarizes the whole experimental protocol, which is detailed in the following sections.

Subjects and experimentaldesign. Four subjects (1 female, 3 males) controlled the synthesizer in real time. The reference speaker was one of them (Speaker 1), i.e. he was also used as a test subject, but with data from a different session than the reference data session. The articulatory data was recorded using the NDI Wave system in similar conditions as for acquiring the reference data (recording at 400Hz and down-sampling to 100Hz), except that only 6 sensors were used to record the articulatorymovements of the lower and upper lips, the tongue tip, dorsum and back, and the jaw. This was due to the fact that the NDI Wave system was limited to 6 sensors when retrievingthe articulatorydata in real-time (while it was possible to use more sensors in offline mode). The soft palate sensor was one of the discarded sensor because

[Figure 15]

- Fig 4. Real-time closed loop synthesis. A) Real-time closed-loop experiment. Articulatory data from a silent speaker are recorded and converted into articulatory input parameters for the articulatory-based speech synthesizer. The speaker receives the auditory feedback of the produced speech through earphones. B) Processing chain for real-time closed-loop articulatory synthesis, where the articulatory-to-articulatory (left part) and articulatory-to-acoustic mappings (right part) are cascaded. Items that depend on the reference speaker are in orange, while those that depend on the new speaker are in blue. The articulatory features of the new speaker are linearly mapped to articulatory features of the reference speaker, which are then mapped to acoustic features using a DNN, which in turn are eventually converted into an audible signal using the MLSA filter and the template-based excitation signal. C) Experimental protocol. First, sensors are glued on the speaker’s articulators, then articulatory data for the calibration is recorded in order to compute the articulatory-toarticulatory mapping, and finally the speaker articulates a set of test items during the closed-loop real-time control of the synthesizer.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g004

most subjects (3 out of 4) were very uncomfortable with keeping the soft palate sensor for a long duration. The corner lip sensors were also discarded because they were the least informative for the synthesis. While the coils were positioned at the same anatomical locations, no particular attention was given to place them at very precise locations.

Articulatory-to-articulatorymapping. In order to estimate the articulatory-to-articula-

tory mapping, it was necessaryto obtain articulatorydata from the new speakers in synchrony with articulatorydata from the reference speaker when articulatingthe same sounds. The new

speakers were thus asked to silently repeat a subset of 50 short sentences (about 4 words each), extractedfrom the reference articulatory-acousticdatabase, in synchrony with the corresponding audio presented through earphones. Each sentence was first displayed on the screen during one second, then after a visual countdown, it was played three times at a fixed pace, so that the speaker could adapt to the reference speaker rate and way of speaking.Only the last repetition was considered in order to obtain the best temporal synchronization. Subjects were asked to repeat the sentences silently, and not loudly, because of significant differences that may exist betweensilent and vocalizedspeech, and because subsequent real-time closed-loopcontrol of the synthesizer would then be achieved while subjects were silently speaking.For each silent speaker, the articulatory-to-articulatorymapping was performedusing a linear model mapping the articulatorydata of the speaker to those of the reference speaker. For this purpose,the frames corresponding to silence periodswere discarded. In order to counterbalance speaker and system latencies, a global delay betweennew and reference articulatorydata was estimated for each speaker by tryingdifferent delays. A different linear model betweenthe new speaker’s articulatorydata and the reference data was computed for each candidate delay. Each linear model was then applied to the new speaker’s articulatorydata, and the mean-squared error (MSE) between predicted and actual reference articulatorydata was computed. The delay which led to the smallest MSE was considered to be due to system latency and was corrected before the training of the final model by simply shifting and cutting the original data. Out of the 50 calibration sentences, 40 were used for the training of the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping while the remaining 10 sentences were kept for testing (randomly chosen, but identical across all speakers). By contrast with the articulatory-to-acoustic mapping, the articulatoryto-articulatorymapping was done frame-by-frame, without concatenating any past frame.

Real-timecontrol. As shown in Fig 4B, the real-time control of the articulatory-based speech synthesizer was achieved by cascading the linear model used for articulatory-to-articulatory mapping and the DNN used for articulatory-to-acousticmapping (using 14 articulatory parameters). The input articulatorydata capture and processing (especiallythe re-referencing with regards to the reference sensor), the linear and DNN mappings and the MLSA filter were all implemented within the Max/MSP environment (Cycling’74, Walnut CA, USA, https:// cycling74.com/products/max/)dedicated to real-time audio processing. Special attention was given to audio settings in order to minimize the audio chain latency and obtain a delay inferior to 30ms. Since the subjects were in silent speech condition, and thus no glottal activity was present, we used the template-based excitation signal for the MLSA filter. During this closedloop situation, each speaker was asked to silently articulate a set of test items while given the synthesized auditory feedback through amagnetic Nicolet TIP-300 insert earphones (Nicolet Biomedical, Madison, USA) ensuring no interference with the magnetic field of the NDI Wave system. The auditory feedback was recorded for furtherintelligibility evaluation. Subjects were allowed to adapt to the closed-loopsituation for at least 20 minutes. Then, they were asked to pronounce a set of test items, which were not part of the datasets used to train the articulatory-toacoustic and the articulatory-to-articulatorymappings. The test set consisted of the 7 isolated vowels /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/, /œ/, and /y/, and 21 vowel-consonant-vowel (VCV) pseudo-words made by the 7 consonants /b/, /d/, /g/, /l/, /v/, /z/ and /ʒ/, in /a/, /i/ and /u/ context (e.g.,‘aba’ or ‘ili’). We chose not to include nasal vowels (e.g.,/ɑ~/, which corresponds to a nasalized/a/) since no sensor was placed on the soft palate. Likewise,we did not include nasal consonants (e.g.,/m/ or /n/) and most unvoiced consonants (e.g.,/p/ which roughly corresponds to an unvoiced /b/). Each item of the test set was repeated three times in a row. The whole set of items was repeated three times by each speaker, each repetition being separated by about 10 minutes of free control of the synthesizer.

#### Evaluation protocol

The quality of open and closed-loopspeech synthesis was assessed in two ways. We first carried out a qualitative evaluation, in which the acoustic signals obtained by offlinesynthesis from the reference database corpus (reference offlinesynthesis) or during closed-loopexperiments (closed-loopsynthesis) were compared with the original signals processed through analysissynthesis. Analysis-synthesis was performedby converting the audio signals into mel-cepstrum (MEL) coefficients,which were then directly converted back into audio signals using the MLSA filter and template-based excitation. Such signal is referred here to as the ‘anasynth signal’. This conversion is not lossless, though it represents what would be the best achievable quality for the synthetic speech signal in the present context.

Then we carried out a quantitative evaluation of our system through an intelligibility test. Twelve subjects participated to this test. All participants were French native speakers with no hearing impairment.

For the offline reference synthesis, the evaluated stimuli consisted of the 10 vowels /a/, /i/, /u/, /o/, /œ/, /e/, /y/, /ã/, /ε~/, and /ɔ~/, and the 48 VCVs made of /p/, /t/, /k/, /f/, /s/, /ʃ/, /b/, /d/, /g/, /v/, /z/, /ʒ/, /m/, /n/, /r/, and /l/, in /a/, /i/ and /u/ contexts (i.e., ‘apa’, ‘iti’, ‘uku’, and so on). Each stimuli was synthesized and thus evaluated in 5 different conditions: 4 times using a pulse train excitation generated using the original pitch for each different number of articulatory parameters (27, 14, 10 and 7), and one time using the artificialtemplate-based excitation signal (corresponding to a constantly voiced sound) with all 27 articulatoryparameters. In the following, these 5 conditions are respectively denoted as Pitch_27, Pitch_14, Pitch_10, Pitch_7 and FixedPitch_27. This allowed us to evaluate both the influence of the number of articulatory parameters on the intelligibility, and the effect of using or not using glottal activity information (here, the pitch). Indeed, while in the real-time closed-loopexperiment presented here no glottal activity is recorded, this glottal activity could be obtained by decodingthe neural activity in future BCI application. An additional evaluation was performedfor the two conditions Pitch_27 and Pitch_14, which consisted in directly transcribing 30 sentences (see S1 Appendix for the list of these sentences). For each listener, half of the sentences were randomly picked from the first condition and the other half from the other, ensuring that each listener never evaluated the same sentence twice, and that all sentences were evaluated in both conditions.

For the real-time closed-loopsynthesis, the evaluated stimuli consisted of the 7 vowels /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/, /œ/, and /y/, and the 21 VCVs made of /b/, /d/, /g/, /l/, /v/, /z/ and /ʒ/, in /a/, /i/ and /u/ contexts. Each listener evaluated 3 repetitions (randomly picked for each listener) of each of these 28 items for each of the 4 new speakers. Remind that for the real-time closed-loop synthesis, the stimuli were generated using only the fixed-pitch template-based excitation.

In total, each listener had thus to identify 626 sounds (10 vowels + 48 VCVs for each of the 5 different offline synthesis conditions, 7 vowels + 21 VCVs, three times for each of the 4 speakers) and transcribe30 sentences. The sounds were all normalizedusing automatic gain control, and played in random order at the same sound level through Beyerdynamic DT-770 Pro 80 Ohms headphones, while the listener was seated in a quiet environment. No performance feedback was provided during the test.

For the VCVs and vowels evaluation, participants were instructedto selectin a list what they thought was the correspondingvowel in the case of an isolated vowel, or the middle consonant in the case of a VCV sequence.Graphical user interface buttons were randomly shuffledfor each subjectin order to avoid systematic default choice (e.g.,always choosingthe left button when unable to identifya sound). The subjectswere told that some of the sounds were difficultto identify, and thus to choosethe closest sound among the offered possibilities.The recognitionaccuracy was definedas Acc = R/N with R the number of correct answers for the N presented sounds

of the test. Since each item had exactly the same number of repetitions,the chance level was estimated by AccChance = 1/C, with C the number of different item categories. For the offlinereference synthesis, the chance level was thus 1/10 = 10% for vowels, and 1/16 6% for VCVs, while for the real-time closed-loopsynthesis, the chance level was 1/7 14% in both cases.

For the sentences, the subjectswere asked to transcribedirectly the sentences they were listening to. Results were evaluated using the word accuracyWAcc = (N—S—D—I)/N(with N the total number of words, S the number of word substitutions, D the number of deletions and I the number of insertions),which is a commonly used metricin the field of automatic speechrecognition.

#### Statistical analysis

Analysis of the offlinereference synthesis. Severallisteners had to identify the same synthesized items, resulting in a binary answer (wrong or right), for each item and each listener. Statistical analysis of these results was thus performedusing mixed logistic regression. For the VCVs and vowels, the following model was used: Result ~ (Segment + Condition)^2 + (1 | Listener), where Result is the binary answer (equals 0 if the item was wrongly identified,otherwise 1), Segment has two levels corresponding to the type of item (vowel or VCV), Condition has five levels corresponding to the five different conditions (Pitch_27, Pitch_14, Pitch_10, Pitch_7 and FixedPitch_27), and Listener has 12 levels corresponding to each listener that participated in the listening test. Multiple comparisons were made using contrasts according to [56]. For the sentences, a paired Student test was performedto compare the results. All the tests were made using the R software, and packages lme4, multcomp and lsmeans.

Analysis of the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping. For the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping, mean distance betweenpredicted articulatorytrajectoriesand reference articulatory trajectorieswas computed for each item of the test corpus and each speaker. A two-factor ANOVA with repeated measures was performedusing the following model: Distance ~ Sensor RefSpeaker + Error (Item / (Sensor RefSpeaker)), where Distance is the mean distance betweenpredicted and reference trajectories,RefSpeaker has two levels indicating if it was the reference speaker (Speaker 1) or another speaker (Speaker 2, 3 or 4), Item corresponds to the identifierof the tested item, and Sensor has 7 levels corresponding to the different EMA sensor positions to be predicted (upper lip, lower lip, jaw, tongue tip, tongue dorsum, tongue back and velum). Multiple comparisons were made using contrasts according to [56]. All the tests were made using the R software, and packages lme4, and multcomp.

Analysis of the real-time closed-loop synthesis. As for offline reference synthesis, statistical analysis of the real-time closed-loopsynthesis results was performedusing mixed logistic regression. The following model was used: Result ~ (Segment + RefSpeaker) ^ 2 + (1 | Listener), where Result is the binary answer (equals 0 if the item was wrongly identified,otherwise1), Segment has two levels corresponding to the type of item (vowel or VCV), RefSpeaker has two levels indicating if it was the reference speaker (Speaker 1) or another speaker (Speaker 2, 3 or 4), and Listener has 12 levels corresponding to each listener that participated in the listening test. Multiple comparisons were made using contrasts according to [56]. All the tests were made using the R software, and packages lme4, multcomp and lsmeans.

#### Results Intelligibility of the articulatory-based speech synthesizer (offline reference synthesis)

First, we evaluated the proposed DNN-based articulatorysynthesizer describedin the Methods section.Fig 5 shows the spectrogramof the original sound for an example sentence (the

[Figure 20]

- Fig 5. Offline reference synthesis example. Comparison of the spectrograms of the original audio, and the corresponding audio signal produced by the 5 different offline articulatory synthesis for the sentence “Le fermier est parti pour la foire” (“The farmer went to the fair”). Dashed lines show the phonetic segmentation obtained by forced-alignment.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g005

sentence was “Le fermier est parti pour la foire”, meaning “The farmer went to the fair”), together with the 5 different synthesis. Note that there is speech present in the synthesized sample before the actual beginningof the reference sentence, since no assumption can be made on the presence of the air flow when considering only articulatorydata. The corresponding synthesized sounds are provided in S1–S6 Audio Files, furtherillustrating the good intelligibility of the synthesized sounds when using at least 10 articulatoryparameters. Note however that, in the following, the quality of the articulatory-to-acousticmapping was evaluated subjectively by naive listeners mainly on isolated vowels and VCVs in order to avoid the influence of the linguistic context that tends to over-estimate evaluation results.

Fig 6 summarizes the result of the subjective listening test. The recognition accuracywas better for vowels than for consonants for FixedPitch_27, Pitch_27 and Pitch_7 (P < 0.01), while this difference was only a trend for Pitch_14 (P = 0.0983) and Pitch_10 (P > 0.99).

For vowels, the recognitionaccuracywas far above chance (chance level = 10%) for all conditions (P < 0.01, Fig 6A) and decreasing when decreasing the number of articulatoryparameters, ranging from 89% for Pitch_27 to 61% for Pitch_7. Taking Pitch_27 as reference, this decrease was not found significant for Pitch_14 (P = 0.7116), and significant for Pitch_10 and Pitch_7 (P < 0.01 in both cases). No statistically significant difference was observedwhen not using the glottal activity versus when using the glottal activity (FixedPitch_27 = 87%, Pitch_27 = 89%, P > 0.99).

For the consonants, the recognitionaccuracywas also far above chance (chance level = 6.25%) for all conditions (P < 0.01, Fig 6A). A decrease in recognition accuracywas also observedwhen decreasing the number of articulatoryparameters, ranging from 70% for Pitch_27 to 42% for Pitch_7. However, taking Pitch_27 as reference, this decrease was not significant for Pitch 14 (P > 0.99) and Pitch 10 (P = 0.6328), and only significant for Pitch_7 (P < 0.01). A significant difference was observedwhen not using the glottal activity (FixedPitch_27 vs Pitch_27, P < 0.01). The differences in recognitionaccuracyfor each condition were studied regarding the vowel of the VCV (Fig 6B) and the consonant (Fig 6C). Overallthe intelligibility was higher when the consonant was in /a/ context (/a/ being the most represented phone in the corpus, see Fig 3A) than when in /i/ and /u/ context (P < 0.01), and no significant difference was observedbetween/i/ and /u/ contexts (P > 0.99): for instance, for Pitch_27, accuracydecreasedfrom 80% for /a/ context, to 63% and 67% for /i/ and /u/ contexts respectively. Regarding consonants (Fig 6C), no clear differences were observedbetweenthe three synthesis Pitch_27, Pitch_14 and Pitch_10 except for /p/, /l/, /d/, /g/ and /ʒ/. Clear differences betweenthese three conditions and Pitch_7 were observedfor consonants /p/, /f/, /b/, /v/, /ʒ/, /m/, /n/, /r/ and /l/. Clear differences were also observedbetween FixedPitch_27 and Pitch_27 for the unvoiced consonants /p/, /t/, /k/, /f/, /s/, and /ʃ/. Conversely, no significant differences betweenFixedPitch_27 and Pitch_27 were found for all the voiced consonants, which includes all the consonants chosen for the real-time closed loop synthesis that does not use the glottal activity (i.e. it is similar to FixedPitch_27). All conditions taken together, best results (at least one condition above 90%) were achieved for the fricative consonants /f/, /s/, /ʃ/, /z/, and /ʒ/, the nasal consonants /m/ and /n/, and /l/. Worst results (all conditions below 50%) were achieved

[Figure 22]

- Fig 6. Subjective evaluation of the intelligibility of the speech synthesizer (offline reference synthesis). A–Recognition accuracy for vowels and consonants for each of the 5 synthesis conditions. The dashed lines show the chance level for vowels (blue) and VCVs (orange). B–Recognition accuracy of the VCVs regarding the vocalic context, for the 5 synthesis conditions. The dashed line shows the chance level. C–Recognition accuracy of the consonant of the VCVs, for the 5 synthesis conditions. Dashed line shows the chance level. See text for statistical comparison results.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g006

for the plosive consonants /p/, /t/, /k/, /b/ and /d/. Note that there is no clear correlation with the number of occurrencesof each phone in the training corpus, since for instance the corpus contained few instances of /ʃ/, and a large number of /t/ (Fig 3A).

Analysis of the confusion matrices can enlighten the sources of synthesis errors (Fig 7). Each row i of a confusion matrix M corresponds to the ground truth phone pi, while column j corresponds to the phone pj recognizedby the listeners, so that a diagonal value Mi,i corresponds to the proportion of occurrencesof the phone pi that were correctly recognized,and a value Mi,j outside the diagonal corresponds to the proportion of occurrencesof the phone pi that were recognizedas the phone pj. The order of the rows and columns of the confusion matrices were automatically sorted in order to emphasize the main confusions by forming high value blocks near the diagonal.

The confusion matrices of the perceptual listening test for the condition Pitch_27 (Fig 7, middle row) reflect the global good quality of this synthesis (indicated by the fact that they are near-diagonal matrices). For vowels, six out of the ten vowels were always correctly recognized (/o/, /u/, /a/, /œ/, /y/ and /e/). Main errors come from confusions between/ε~/ and /a/ (67% of / ε~ / were recognizedas /a/), and other errors come from confusions between/ɑ~/ and /a/ (17% of /ɑ~/ were recognizedas /a/), and between/ɔ~/ and /œ/ (17% of /ɔ~/ were recognizedas /œ/. For consonants, main confusions came from /b/ being recognizedas /v/ (75%), /d/ being recognized as /z/ (58%), /p/ being recognizedas /f/ (56%) and /d/ being recognizedas /z/ (58%). Other more minor errors come from /g/ being recognizedas /v/ (11%), and /k/ being recognized as /r/ (19%) and /t/ (19%).

By comparing confusion matrices of Pitch_27 with those of FixedPitch_27, we can observe that not using the glottal activity resulted in increased confusions mainly for the vowel /ɑ~/ (accuracygoing from 83% for Pitch_27 to 58% for FixedPitch_27) while no clear difference can be observedfor the other vowels. Note that between the two conditions Pitch_27 and FixedPitch_27, the articulatory-to-acoustic model remains the same, the only change being the excitation signal that is used for the final synthesis with the MLSA filter. Importantly, for the consonants, not using the glottal activity resulted in a drastic decrease in the recognitionaccuracy of all the unvoiced consonants /p/, /t/, /k/, /f/, /s/ and /ʃ/, while all the voiced consonants remained recognizedwith similar accuracy. Indeed, /p/ was mainly recognizedas /v/ (72%), /t/ as /z/ (58%), /f/ as /v/ (64%), /s/ as /z/ (86%), and /ʃ/ as /ʒ/ (86%). Note that /v/ is the voiced counterpart of /f/, /z/ of /s/ and /ʒ/ of /ʃ/. Hence, the use of the template-based excitation naturally leads to a predictable shift of the unvoiced consonants to their more or less corresponding (in terms of place of articulation)voiced counterparts.

By comparing the confusion matrices of Pitch_27 with those of Pitch_14, we can observe that there is no clear pattern of increased confusions. This confirms the results previously obtained from Fig 6, where no significant differences betweenPitch_27 and Pitch_14 were found for both vowels and consonants.

Finally, the results of the subjective evaluation on sentences are presented in Fig 8. While the recognition accuracyfor Pitch_27 and Pitch_14 was below 90% for vowels and below 70% for consonants, the word recognitionaccuracyfor the sentences is above 90% for both conditions (96% for Pitch_27 and 92% for Pitch_14). Note that the differencein recognitionaccuracy for Pitch_27 and for Pitch_14 is here significant (P = 0.015).

#### Control of the articulatory-based speech synthesizer (real-time closedloop synthesis)

Accuracyof the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping. Fig 9A shows an example of articulatory data recorded from a new speaker (for instance Speaker 2), with the corresponding

[Figure 25]

Fig 7. Confusion matrices of the subjective evaluation of the intelligibility of the speech synthesizer (offline reference synthesis). Confusion matrices for vowels (left) and consonants (right), for each of the three conditions FixedPitch_27, Pitch_27 and Pitch_14. In the matrices, rows correspond to ground truth while columns correspond to user answer. The last column indicates the amount of errors made on each phone. Cells are colored by their values, while text color is for readability only.

doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g007

reference audio signal that the speaker was presented and asked to silently repeat synchronously (in this example, the sentence was “Deux jolis boubous”, meaning “two beautiful booboos”, which was not part of the training set). Fig 9B shows the transformation of these signals after their articulatory-to-articulatory mapping onto the reference speaker’s articulatoryspace. One can clearly see that articulatorymovements of the new speaker were originally quite different than those of the reference speaker;and that they became similar once the articulatory-toarticulatorymapping was performed.

We furtherquantified the quality of the articulatory-to-articulatorymapping. Since articulatory data consist of geometricalcoordinates, the mean Euclidean distance betweenpredicted and true positions could be estimated for each sensor and for each speaker (Fig 9C). The average error across all sensors and speakers was 2.5 mm ± 1.5 mm. Errors were significantly higher for tongue sensors than for non-tongue sensors (P < 0.005 for 22 out of 24 pairwisecomparisons corrected for multiple comparisons–seeMethods), and lower for the velum sensor than for the non-velum sensors (P < 0.001 for 10 out of 12 pairwisecomparisons correctedfor multiple comparisons–seeMethods). This is consistent with the fact that the tongue and velum are the articulators for which movement amplitudes were the highest and lowest, respectively (see Fig 3B). Mean distances for the reference speaker (Speaker 1) were systematically lower than for other speakers for all sensors except the velum. These differences were statistically significant for the tongue tip (P = 0.00229) and the tongue dorsum (P = 0.03051).

Intelligibility of the real-time closed-loop speechsynthesis. During real-time control, the speakers were asked to reproduce a specificset of test sounds (see Materials and Methods). The remaining time of the experiment was kept for other tasks, including spontaneous conversations. S1 and S2 Video Files illustrate the closed-loopexperiment,with Speaker 1 (reference speaker) and Speaker 2 (new speaker),respectively. Fig 10 shows examples of spectrogramsof vowels and VCVs obtained during a session of real-time control (Speaker 2, first occurrenceof each sound), compared with the corresponding spectrogramsof anasynth and reference offline synthesis sounds. In general, we found that the spectrogramsfor the three conditions presented very similar characteristics,although some differences did exist in their fine structure, especially for consonants. For instance, the real-time examples of the plosive consonants /b/, /d/ and /g/ showed more energy smearing from vocalic to consonant segments as compared to the anasynth and offline synthesized versions. Also, the real-time example of /ʒ/ had characteristics closer to the anasynth version of /l/ than to the anasynth version of /ʒ/ (Fig 10B).

The test sounds produced in the closed-loopexperiment were recorded and then their intelligibility was evaluated in the same way as for the offline synthesis intelligibility evaluation, i.e. a subjective intelligibility test performedby 12 listeners. Fig 11 summarizes the result of this listening test. The speech sounds produced by all 4 speakers obtained high vowel accuracy (93% for Speaker 1, 76% for Speaker 2, 85% for Speaker 3, and 88% for Speaker 4, leading to a mean accuracyscore of 86%), and reasonable consonant accuracy(52% for Speaker 1, 49% for Speaker 2, 48% for Speaker 3, and 48% for Speaker 4, leading to a mean accuracyscore of 49%). These scores were far above chance level (chance = 14%, P < 0.001) for both vowels and consonants. For all speakers, the 48–52% VCVs accuracyobtained during real-time control is to be compared to the 61% score obtained for the same VCVs in the offlinereference synthesis. The difference is significant (P = 0.020 for reference speaker and P < 0.001 for other speakers, compare Fig 11A and Fig 6A) but the decrease is quite limited when considering that the speaker is

[Figure 28]

Fig 8. Subjective evaluation of the intelligibility of the speech synthesizer on sentences (offline reference synthesis). Word recognition accuracy for the sentences, for both conditions Pitch_27 and Pitch_14.

doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g008

[Figure 30]

- Fig 9. Articulatory-to-articulatory mapping. A–Articulatory data recorded on a new speaker (Speaker 2) and corresponding reference audio signal for the sentence “Deux jolis boubous” (“Two beautiful booboos”). For each sensor, the X (rostro-caudal), Y (ventro-dorsal) and Z (left-right) coordinates are plotted. Dashed lines show the phonetic segmentation of the reference audio, which the new speaker was ask to silently repeat in synchrony. B–Reference articulatory data (dashed line), and articulatory data of Speaker 2 after articulatory-to-articulatory linear mapping (predicted, plain line) for the same sentence as in A. Note that X,Y,Z data were mapped onto X,Y positions on the midsagittal plane. C–Mean Euclidean distance between reference and predicted sensor position in the reference midsagittal plane for each speaker and each sensor, averaged over the duration of all speech sounds of the calibration corpus. Error bars show the standard deviations, and “All” refer to mean distance error when pooling all the sensors together.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g009

no longer the reference speaker and that the synthesis is performedin an online closed-loop condition. The same observationapplies to the vowel identification results: The 76–93% vowel

[Figure 32]

- Fig 10. Real-time closed loop synthesis examples. Examples of audio spectrograms for anasynth, reference offline synthesis and real-time closed-loop (Speaker 2), A) for the vowels /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/, /œ/ and /y/, and B) for the consonants /b/, /d/, /g/, /l/, /v/, /z/ and /ʒ/ in /a/ context. The thick black line under the spectrograms corresponds to 100 ms.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g010

accuracyfor the closed-looponline synthesis is also found significantly lower than the 99% accuracyscore obtained for the same vowels in the offline synthesis (P < 0.001 for reference and other speakers), but the decrease is relatively limited. The recognitionaccuracyfor vowels was significantly higher for the reference speaker (P = 0.002) but no significant difference betweenthe reference speaker and the other speakers was found for the VCVs (P = 0.262), even if the reference speaker obtained the highest average accuracyvalue for VCVs.

Regarding the vocalic context (Fig 11B), VCVs in /a/ context had better recognitionaccuracy than those in /i/ context (P < 0.001) and /u/ (P < 0.001) for all subjects, which is consistent with results from the offlinereference synthesis. VCVs in /u/ context were found to have a better recognitionaccuracythan those in /i/ context (P = 0.009). Regarding the VCVs (Fig 11C), the recognition accuracyvaried largely across consonants, ranging from an average of 21% for /b/ to 85% for /ʒ/. It was generally lower for the plosive consonants /b/, /d/ and /g/, which is consistent with results from the offlinereference synthesis, while the accuracyon the remaining consonants was different for each subject.For instance, Subjects 1, 2 and 4 had good accuracyon /v/ while Subject 4 had a much lower accuracy. Similar result can be observedfor /z/ and /ʒ/ for different subjects.

[Figure 34]

- Fig 11. Results of the subjective listening test for real-time articulatory synthesis. A–Recognition accuracy for vowels and consonants, for each subject. The grey dashed line shows the chance level, while the blue and orange dashed lines show the corresponding recognition accuracy for the offline articulatory synthesis, for vowels and consonants respectively (on the same subsets of phones). B–Recognition accuracy for the VCVs regarding the vowel context, for each subject. C–Recognition accuracy for the VCVs, by consonant and for each subject. D–Confusion matrices for vowels (left) and consonants from VCVs in /a/ context (right). Rows correspond to ground truth while columns correspond to user answer. The last column indicates the amount of errors made on each phone. Cells are colored by their values, while text color is for readability only.

- doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005119.g011

Confusionmatrices for both vowels and consonants are shown in Fig 11D. These confusion matrices present features that are similar to the confusion matrices obtained for offlinearticulatory synthesis (Fig 7), and reflectwell the results quality. All vowels show a recognitionaccuracy above 80%, and the highest accuracywas obtained for /y/, with 90%. The majority of the confusions are between/e/ and /i/ (17% of /e/ were recognizedas /i/, and 16% of /i/ as /e/). Secondary confusions are between/o/ and /u/ (11% of /u/ were recognizedas /o/, and 8% of /o/ as /u/), between/y/ and /œ/ (10% of /y/ were recognizedas /œ/), and between/a/ and /œ/ (9% of /a/ were recognizedas /œ/). The confusion matrix for consonant roughly corresponds to the confusion matrix obtained for offlinearticulatorysynthesis, with emphasized confusions.Thus, the main confusions occurredagain for plosive consonants /b/ (57% of /b/ were recognizedas /v/) and /d/ (54% of /d/ were recognizedas /z/), while quite few errors were made on /ʒ/ (85% of accuracy).Some errors were also made on /g/ but with less systematic confusion (26% with /v/, 13% with /ʒ/, and 10% with /z/). However, new confusions appeared that explain the significant drop in consonants accuracywith respect to offlinearticulatorysynthesis: between/ʒ/ and /l/ (10% of /ʒ/ were recognizedas /l/), and between/z/ and /l/ (19% of /z/ were recognizedas /l/).

### Discussion

In this paper we first presented an articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer built from articulatory-acousticdata from one reference speaker using deep neural networks, and then showed

that this synthesizer could be controlled in real-time closed-loopsituation by several speakers using motion capture data (electromagneticarticulography) as input parameters. Experiments included the same reference speaker in a different session, as well as other speakers. All speakers were silently articulatingand were given the synthesized acoustic feedback through headphones. A calibration method was used to take into account articulatorydifferences across speakers (and across sessions for the reference speaker), such as sensor positioning and ways of articulatingthe different sounds. Subjective listening tests were conducted to assess the quality of the synthesizer and in particularits performance during real-time closed-loopcontrol by new speakers.

We first assessed the intelligibility of the synthesizer itself. Severalversions of the synthesizer were built to assess the effect of the number of articulatoryparameters (27, 14, 10 and 7), and the effect of using or not using glottal activity (by comparing synthesis using a constant artificialpitch, and the original pitch). The phone recognitionaccuracyfor offline reference synthesis was far above chance level for all five tested parameterizations, and fully intelligible speech sentences could be produced (see Fig 8 and S1–S5 Audio Files). Most errors on vowels were made betweenvowels that had close articulatorypositions (e.g. /i/ and /e/, see Fig 3B). Regarding consonants, most errors were made on the plosive consonants, and main confusions were observedwithin pairs of consonants corresponding to relatively similar articulatory movements in terms of place of articulation:for instance, /b/ is a labial consonant and /v/ is a labio-dental, and /d/ is a dental or an alveolar and /z/ is an alveolar. For /b/-/v/ confusion, this could be explained by a positioning of the EMA coils too far from the lip edges, resulting in a tracking of the lips by the EMA system that did not allow to capture sharp differences between /b/ and /v/ lip movements. A similar interpretation can be given for /d/-/z/ confusions, since in practice the coil had to be attached more than 5 mm back from the tongue tip (see Fig 2A). Moreover, results showed that the accuracyon the VCVs was correlated to the vocalic context, with consonant in /a/ context having a better recognition accuracy. This could be explained by the fact that the phone /a/ is more largely present in the training corpus than the phones /i/ and /u/ (see Fig 3A). However, this is not consistent with the fact that some phones that are less represented in the corpus, like /ʃ/, have high recognitionaccuracy, while other phone that are largely represented, like /d/, have low recognitionaccuracy. Another possible explanation is that /a/ is the most opened vowel and thus VCVs in /a/ context are performedby movements of higher amplitude, which could be more discriminant. By removing the glottal activity information (here by using a constant pitch), we found that the recognitionaccuracysignificantly decreasedfor all unvoiced consonants, while remaining roughly the same for all voiced consonants and vowels (see Fig 6 and top and middle rows of Fig 7). The unvoiced consonants were thus confusedwith their voiced counterpart (e.g. /ʃ/ with /ʒ/), or with the voiced counterpart of the consonant they were already confusedwith (for instance, /p/ was originally confusedwith /s/ in the Pitch_27 condition and was then confusedwith /ʒ/ when using a constant pitch, in the FixedPitch_27 condition). This supports the choice we made to keep only 7 consonants for the real-time closed-loopsynthesis since no glottal activity was available in silent speech condition. It should be noted that the quality of the synthesis could still be improved by estimating an optimal MLSA excitation source using inverse glottal filtering and that it could be envisioned that the parameters of such supplementary signal be predicted from brain signals in a BCI situation.

Regarding the number of articulatoryparameters, results showed that using 14 articulatory parameters yields intelligibility scores that are close to the best scores achieved with 27 parameters. This supports the choice that was made to use a synthesizer with 14 articulatoryparameters for the real-time closed-loopsynthesis. Interestingly, using 10 parameters did not significantly impact the intelligibility of consonants, but started to affect that of vowels,

although the accuracyremained at the high level of 67%. Decreasing furtherthe number of parameters down to 7, significantly impacted the intelligibility of both vowels and consonants. Finally, although the accuracyon consonants was inferior to 70% for 27 and 14 articulatory parameters, this was enough to produce very intelligible sentences, with word recognitionaccuracy superior to 90% (see Fig 9). This can be explained by the fact that most confusions were made with similar consonants, thus ensuring a good intelligibility when constrained with closed vocabularyand syntactic rules.Thus, overall, the number of parameters required to achieve a sufficient intelligibility is of the order of the 10 degrees of freedoms that could be controlled successfully in recent state of the art BCI experiments (Wodlinger et al. 2015). It should be noted that the reduction in the number of parameters was done here in a drastic way either by dropping parameters or by PCA, while more efficientdimensionality reduction techniques could be envisioned such as autoencoders that we previously started to investigate [35].

Next, we assessedthe intelligibility of the real-time closed-loopsynthesis. In this case, the phone recognitionaccuracywas again far above chance level, both for vowels and consonants (Fig 11). Interestingly, this goodintelligibility was obtained despite significanttrajectoryerrors made on input control parameters obtained by the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping (about 2.5 mm on average, see Fig 9B). This confirms our previous results indicating that DNN-based articulatorysynthesis is robust to fluctuations of the input parameters [35]. As expected,the closed-loopsynthesis intelligibility was lower than for the reference offlinesynthesis. However, it was relatively limited. Confusionswere similarly distributed in both cases, indicating that using the synthesizer in a closed-loopparadigmmainly emphasized the already existing confusions. The fact that most errors were consistent betweenofflineand closed-loopsynthesis suggests that real-time closed-looparticulatorysynthesis could still benefitfrom improving the articulatoryto-acoustic mapping. This could be achievedby efficientlydetectingspecificconstrictionsfrom the articulatorydata in order to improve the synthesis of plosive consonants, which are the major source of errors. The presence of additional minor confusions suggests that other aspects might also be improved, such as the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping with a better calibration approach. Indeed, to remain in a situation as close as possible to future BCI paradigms with aphasic participants, the articulatory-to-articulatory calibration step was performedunder a silent speech condition. This was also consistent with the fact that the closed-loopcondition was also performedin a silent speechcondition so that the speakerreceivedonly the synthesizedfeedback, not superimposedon his/her own produced speech.Thus the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping converted articulatorytrajectoriesrecorded under a silent speech condition (for each speaker) into articulatorytrajectoriesrecorded under overt speech condition (of the reference speaker).Previous studies have shown that articulatorymovements differ betweensilent and overt speech,and especiallythat silent speakers tend to hypo-articulate[57,58]. Such phenomenon may thus leads to smaller discriminationof articulatorytrajectoriesduring silent speech.

Improving the articulatory-to-articulatoryand the articulatory-to-acousticmappings might however not be the sole possibility to improve the intelligibility of closed-loopspeech synthesis. Indeed, while results from the evaluation of the articulatory-to-articulatorymapping showed that for most sensors the mean prediction error was lower for Speaker 1 (the reference speaker),the results obtained during the real-time experiment showed that other speakers could achieve a control of the articulatorysynthesizer similar to Speaker 1, in particularfor consonants (see Fig 11A). For example, episodes of spontaneous conversation could be achieved not only with Speaker 1 but also with Speaker 2 (see S1 and S2 Video Files). This suggests that other factors come into play for the control of the synthesizer. One possibility is that subjects may adapt differently to the articulatory-to-articulatory mapping errors and find behavioral strategies to compensate for these errors. Here, each subject had about 20 minutes of free closed-loopcontrol of the synthesizer betweenthe two productions of test items, but we

could not see any significant improvement over this short periodof time. Finding behavioral strategies might thus need a more significant amount of training time. Finally, and according to the results from the offlinereference synthesis, all unvoiced consonants were excluded since no glottal activity can be recorded in silent speech condition. In a BCI application for speech rehabilitation, such glottal activity could be predicted from the neural activity, thus allowing the synthesis of all the French phones.

To our knowledge these results are the first indication that an intelligible articulatory-based speech synthesizer can be controlled in real-time by different speakers to produce not only vowels, but also intelligible consonants and some sentences (some spontaneous conversations, while not reported here, could be achieved with 2 of the 4 subjects using only the synthesized audio i.e. the interlocutor could not see the subject articulating).These results thus go beyond previous preliminary achievements of speech synthesis from EMA data where discrete sentences could be successfullyclassified in a closed vocabularycontext with training and testing performedin the same subjects [59]. Indeed, here the speech synthesis was performedin real time on a frame-by-frame basis to provide an online audio feedback delivered in real time with a very short time delay (less than 30 ms). Moreover, we showed here that a synthesizer built from a reference speaker data in an overt speech condition could be controlled to produce free speech in real time in a silent speech condition by other speakers with a different vocal tract anatomy and a different articulatorystrategy using a simple linear calibration stage. This result is of particularinterest for the emerging research field on ‘silent speech interfaces’, which are lightweight devices able to capture silent articulationusing non-invasive sensors and convert it into audible speech [60–63]. Indeed, although the presented EMA-based interface is not strictly a silent-speech interface, the present results indicate that it is possible to synthesize intelligible speech in real time from articulatorydata acquired in silent speech condition. Further studies could extend these results using less invasive techniques to obtain articulatorysignals, such as EMG [61,62] and/or ultrasound signals [63,64].

Finally, this study is also a first step toward future speech BCI applications. Here we indeed showed that closed-loopspeech synthesis was possible by subjects that had different speech production constrains (e.g., different anatomy of the vocal tract, different manner of articulation) than those of the reference speaker from whom the speech synthesizer was built. This means that differences in anatomical constrains could be compensated by the articulatory-toarticulatorymapping. In the context of a speech BCI paradigm,a similar situation will be encountered, where the synthesizer will be built from a subject different that the BCI participants. In this case, the question will be whether differences in neuronal constrains between individuals can also be compensated by a proper neural signal decodingstrategy. Here, the DNN-based mapping approach was robust to trajectoryerrors of several millimeters that were present in the input signals of the synthesizer resulting from imperfectionsin the articulatoryto-articulatorymapping. This is encouraging given that decodingneural signal into input signals of the synthesizer will also be imperfect,and suggests that an articulatory-basedspeech synthesizer such as the one developedand tested here is a good candidate for being used in a speech BCI paradigm.The choice we made here to envision articulatoryparameters as an intermediate representation for decodingspeech from neural activity recorded from the speech motor cortex. This hypothesis will need to be tested in future BCI experiment and compared to a direct decodingof corticalactivity into acoustic speech parameters.

### Supporting Information

S1 Appendix. List of the sentences used for the subjectiveevaluation of the synthesizer. (DOCX)

- S1 Audio File. Exampleof original audio from the reference speaker. The corresponding sentence is “Le fermier est parti pour la foire” (“The farmer went to the fair”). (WAV)
- S2 Audio File. Exampleof a sentence synthesizedfrom the reference speakerdata (reference offlinesynthesis)for the FixedPitch_27 condition (fixed-pitch template-basedexcitation signal and 27 articulatoryparameters).The corresponding sentence is “Le fermier est parti pour la foire” (“The farmer went to the fair”). (WAV)
- S3 Audio File. Exampleof a sentence synthesizedfrom the reference speakerdata (reference offlinesynthesis)for the Pitch_27 condition (excitation signal generated using the pitch extractedfrom the original audio and 27 articulatoryparameters).The corresponding sentence is “Le fermier est parti pour la foire” (“The farmer went to the fair”). (WAV)
- S4 Audio File. Exampleof a sentence synthesizedfrom the reference speakerdata (reference offlinesynthesis)for the Pitch_14 condition (excitation signal generated using the pitch extractedfrom the original audio and 14 articulatoryparameters).The corresponding sentence is “Le fermier est parti pour la foire” (“The farmer went to the fair”). (WAV)
- S5 Audio File. Exampleof a sentence synthesizedfrom the reference speakerdata (reference offlinesynthesis)for the Pitch_10 condition (excitation signal generated using the pitch extractedfrom the original audio and 10 articulatoryparameters).The corresponding sentence is “Le fermier est parti pour la foire” (“The farmer went to the fair”). (WAV)
- S6 Audio File. Exampleof a sentence synthesizedfrom the reference speakerdata (reference offlinesynthesis)for the Pitch_7 condition (excitation signal generated using the pitch extractedfrom the original audio and 7 articulatoryparameters).The corresponding sentence is “Le fermier est parti pour la foire” (“The farmer went to the fair”). (WAV)

- S1 Video File. Exampleof spontaneous conversation during the real-timeclosed-loopcontrol of the synthesizerby the reference speaker(Speaker1). The corresponding sentence is “Je ne t’entends pas” (“I cannot hear you”). (MP4)
- S2 Video File. Exampleof spontaneous conversation during the real-timeclosed-loopcontrol of the synthesizerby a new speaker(Speaker2). The corresponding sentence is “Je vais être papa. C’est une bonne occasion de vous l’annoncer. Je suis très content.” (“I am going to be a father. It is a good opportunity to tell you this. I am very happy.”). (MP4)

### Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Silvain Gerberfor his help in the statistical analysis of the results.

### Author Contributions

Conceivedand designedthe experiments:FB TH LG BY. Performed the experiments:FB TH CS BY.

Analyzedthe data: FB TH BY. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: FB. Wrote the paper:FB TH LG BY.

### References

- 1. Birbaumer N, Ghanayim N, Hinterberger T, Iversen I, Kotchoubey B, Kubler A, et al. A spelling device for the paralysed. Nature. 1999; 398: 297–8. doi: 10.1038/18581 PMID: 10192330
- 2. Chapin JK, Moxon KA, Markowitz RS, Nicolelis MA. Real-time control of a robot arm using simultaneously recorded neurons in the motor cortex. Nat Neurosci. 1999; 2: 664–70. doi: 10.1038/10223 PMID: 10404201
- 3. Wessberg J, Stambaugh CR, Kralik JD, Beck PD, Laubach M, Chapin JK, et al. Real-time prediction of hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical neurons in primates. Nature. 2000; 408: 361–365. doi: 10. 1038/35042582 PMID: 11099043
- 4. Serruya MD, Hatsopoulos NG, Paninski L, Fellows MR, Donoghue JP. Brain-machine interface: Instant neural control of a movement signal. Nature. 2002; 416: 141–142. doi: 10.1038/416141a PMID: 11894084
- 5. Hochberg L, Serruya MD, Friehs GM, Mukand JA, Saleh M, Caplan AH, et al. Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia. Nature. 2006; 442: 164–171. doi: 10.1038/ nature04970 PMID: 16838014
- 6. Velliste M, Perel S, Spalding MC, Whitford AS, Schwartz AB. Cortical control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding. Nature. Nature Publishing Group; 2008; 453: 1098–1101. doi: 10.1038/nature06996 PMID: 18509337
- 7. Hochberg L, Bacher D, Jarosiewicz B, Masse N, Simeral J, Vogel J, et al. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic arm. Nature. Nature Publishing Group; 2012; 485: 372–5. doi: 10.1038/nature11076 PMID: 22596161
- 8. Gilja V, Nuyujukian P, Chestek C a, Cunningham JP, Yu BM, Fan JM, et al. A high-performance neural prosthesis enabled by control algorithm design. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15: 1752–7. doi: 10.1038/nn.3265 PMID: 23160043
- 9. Collinger JL, Wodlinger B, Downey JE, Wang W, Tyler-Kabara EC, Weber DJ, et al. High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia. Lancet. Elsevier Ltd; 2013; 381: 557–64. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61816-9 PMID: 23253623
- 10. Donchin E, Spencer KM, Wijesinghe R. The mental prosthesis: Assessing the speed of a P300-based brain- computer interface. IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng. 2000; 8: 174–179. PMID: 10896179
- 11. Brumberg JS, Guenther FH. Development of speech prostheses: current status and recent advances. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2010; 7: 667–79. doi: 10.1586/erd.10.34 PMID: 20822389
- 12. Guenther FH, Brumberg JS, Wright EJ, Nieto-Castanon A, Tourville J a, Panko M, et al. A wireless brain-machine interface for real-time speech synthesis. PLoS One. 2009; 4: e8218. doi: 10.1371/ journal.pone.0008218 PMID: 20011034
- 13. Pasley BN, Knight RT. Decoding speech for understanding and treating aphasia. 1st ed. Progress in brain research. Elsevier B.V.; 2013.
- 14. Chan AM, Dykstra AR, Jayaram V, Leonard MK, Travis KE, Gygi B, et al. Speech-Specific Tuning of Neurons in Human Superior Temporal Gyrus. Cereb cortex. 2013; 10: 2679–93.
- 15. Kellis S, Miller K, Thomson K, Brown R, House P, Greger B. Decoding spoken words using local field potentials recorded from the cortical surface. J Neural Eng. 2010; 7: 056007. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/ 7/5/056007 PMID: 20811093
- 16. Pei X, Barbour DL, Leuthardt EC, Schalk G. Decoding vowels and consonants in spoken and imagined words using electrocorticographic signals in humans. J Neural Eng. 2011; 8: 046028. doi: 10.1088/ 1741-2560/8/4/046028 PMID: 21750369
- 17. Tankus A, Fried I, Shoham S. Structured neuronal encoding and decoding of human speech features. Nat Commun. Nature Publishing Group; 2012; 3: 1015. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1995 PMID: 22910361
- 18. Martin S, Brunner P, Holdgraf C, Heinze H-J, Crone NE, Rieger J, et al. Decoding spectrotemporal features of overt and covert speech from the human cortex. Front Neuroeng. 2014; 7: 14. doi: 10.3389/ fneng.2014.00014 PMID: 24904404
- 19. Mugler EM, Patton JL, Flint RD, Wright Z a, Schuele SU, Rosenow J, et al. Direct classification of all American English phonemes using signals from functional speech motor cortex. J Neural Eng. 2014; 11: 035015. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/11/3/035015 PMID: 24836588

- 20. Herff C, Heger D, de Pesters A, Telaar D, Brunner P, Schalk G, et al. Brain-to-text: decoding spoken phrases from phone representations in the brain. Front Neurosci. 2015; 9: 1–11.
- 21. Bouchard KE, Mesgarani N, Johnson K, Chang EF. Functional organization of human sensorimotor cortex for speech articulation. Nature. Nature Publishing Group; 2013; 495: 327–32. doi: 10.1038/ nature11911 PMID: 23426266
- 22. Hickok G, Poeppel D. The cortical organization of speech processing. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2007; 8: 393–402. doi: 10.1038/nrn2113 PMID: 17431404
- 23. Hickok G, Houde J, Rong F. Sensorimotor integration in speech processing: computational basis and neural organization. Neuron. Elsevier Inc.; 2011; 69: 407–22. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.01.019 PMID: 21315253
- 24. Penfield W, Boldrey E. Somatic motor and sensory representation in the cerebral cortex of man as studied by electrical stimulation. Brain. 1937; 60: 389–443.
- 25. Pulvermu¨ller F, Huss M, Kherif F, Moscoso del Prado Martin F, Hauk O, Shtyrov Y. Motor cortex maps articulatory features of speech sounds. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103: 7865–70.
- 26. Guenther FH. Cortical interactions underlying the production of speech sounds. J Commun Disord. 2006; 39: 350–365. doi: 10.1016/j.jcomdis.2006.06.013 PMID: 16887139
- 27. Grabski K, Lamalle L, Vilain C, Schwartz J-L, Valle´e N, Tropres I, et al. Functional MRI assessment of orofacial articulators: neural correlates of lip, jaw, larynx, and tongue movements. Hum Brain Mapp. 2012; 33: 2306–21. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21363 PMID: 21826760
- 28. Tate MC, Herbet G, Moritz-Gasser S, Tate JE, Duffau H. Probabilistic map of critical functional regions of the human cerebral cortex: Broca’s area revisited. Brain. 2014; 137: 2773–2782. doi: 10.1093/brain/ awu168 PMID: 24970097
- 29. Cheung C, Hamiton LS, Johnson K, Chang EF. The auditory representation of speech sounds in human motor cortex. Elife. 2016; 5: 1–19.
- 30. Maeda S. A digital simulation method of the vocal-tract system. Speech Commun. 1982; 199–229.
- 31. Sondhi M, Schroeter J. A hybrid time-frequency domain articulatory speech synthesizer. IEEE Trans Acoust. 1987; 35.
- 32. Kello CT, Plaut DC. A neural network model of the articulatory-acoustic forward mapping trained on recordings of articulatory parameters. J Acoust Soc Am. 2004; 116: 2354. PMID: 15532666
- 33. Birkholz P, Jackel D, Kroger KJ. Construction And Control Of A Three-Dimensional Vocal Tract Model. 2006 IEEE Int Conf Acoust Speech Signal Process Proc. 2006; 1: 873–876.
- 34. Toda T, Black AW, Tokuda K. Statistical mapping between articulatory movements and acoustic spectrum using a Gaussian mixture model. Speech Commun. 2008; 50: 215–227.
- 35. Bocquelet F, Hueber T, Girin L, Badin P, Yvert B. Robust Articulatory Speech Synthesis using Deep Neural Networks for BCI Applications. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association (Interspeech). 2014. pp. 2288–2292.
- 36. Assaneo MF, Trevisan M a., Mindlin GB. Discrete motor coordinates for vowel production. PLoS One. 2013; 8.
- 37. Preuß S, Neuschaefer-Rube C, Birkholz P. Real-time control of a 2D animation model of the vocal tract using optopalatography. Proc Annu Conf Int Speech Commun Assoc INTERSPEECH. 2013; 997–1001.
- 38. Story BH. Phrase-level speech simulation with an airway modulation model of speech production. Comput Speech Lang. Elsevier Ltd; 2013; 27: 989–1010. doi: 10.1016/j.csl.2012.10.005 PMID: 23503742
- 39. Toutios a, Ouni S, Laprie Y. Estimating the control parameters of an articulatory model from electromagnetic articulograph data. J Acoust Soc Am. 2011; 129: 3245–3257. doi: 10.1121/1.3569714 PMID: 21568426
- 40. Beautemps D, Badin P, Bailly G. Linear degrees of freedom in speech production: Analysis of cineradio- and labio-film data and articulatory-acoustic modeling. J Acoust Soc Am. 2001; 109: 2165–2180. PMID: 11386568
- 41. Ifft PJ, Shokur S, Li Z, Lebedev M a, International LS. Brain-Machine Interface Enables Bimanual Arm Movements in Monkeys. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5. e
- 42. Wodlinger B, Downey JE, Tyler-Kabara EC, Schwartz a B, Boninger ML, Collinger JL. Ten-dimensional anthropomorphic arm control in a human brain-machine interface: difficulties, solutions, and limitations. J Neural Eng. IOP Publishing; 2015; 12: 016011. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/12/1/016011 PMID: 25514320
- 43. Richmond K, Hoole P, King S, Forum I. Announcing the Electromagnetic Articulography (Day 1) Subset of the mngu0 Articulatory Corpus. Proc Interspeech.: 1–4.

- 44. Urı´a B. A Deep Belief Network for the Acoustic-Articulatory Inversion Mapping Problem [Internet]. 2011.
- 45. Tokuda K, Oura K, Tamamori A, Sako S, Zen H, Nose T, et al. Speech Signal Processing Toolkit (SPTK). In: http://sp-tk.sourceforge.net/. 2014.
- 46. Imai S, Sumita K, Furuichi C. Mel Log Spectrum Approximation (MLSA) Filter for Speech Synthesis. Electron Commun Japan. 1983; 66-A: 10–18.
- 47. Grimaldi M, Fivela BG. New technologies for simultaneous acquisition of speech articulatory data: 3D articulograph, ultrasound and electroglottograph. Proc .... 2008;
- 48. Markel JD, Gray AH. Linear Prediction of Speech [Internet]. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1976.
- 49. Bechet F. LIA_PHON—Un systeme complet de phonetisation de textes. Trait Autom des Langues. 2001; 42.
- 50. Larochelle H, Bengio Y, Lamblin P. Exploring Strategies for Training Deep Neural Networks. J Mach Learn Res. 2009; 1: 1–40.
- 51. Aryal S, Gutierrez-Osuna R. Data driven articulatory synthesis with deep neural networks. Comput Speech Lang. Elsevier Ltd; 2015; 1–14.
- 52. Hinton G. A Practical Guide to Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines. Comput Sci. 2010; 7700: 599–619.
- 53. Hinton GE, Salakhutdinov RR. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science. 2006; 313: 504–7. doi: 10.1126/science.1127647 PMID: 16873662
- 54. Rumelhart DE, Hinton GE, Williams RJ. Learning representations by back-propagating errors. Nature. 1986; 323: 533–536.
- 55. Rasmussen CE. Function minimization using conjugate gradients. 1996;0: 1–7.
- 56. Hothorn T, Bretz F, Westfall P. Simultaneous Inference in General Parametric Models. Biometrical J. 2008; 50: 346–363.
- 57. Hueber T, Badin P, Savariaux C. Differences in articulatory strategies between silent, whispered and normal speech? a pilot study using electromagnetic articulography. Proc ISSP, to .... 2010; 0–1.
- 58. Janke M, Wand M, Schultz T. Impact of lack of acoustic feedback in EMG-based silent speech recognition. Proc Interspeech. 2010; 2686–2689.
- 59. Wang J, Samal A, Green JR. Across-speaker Articulatory Normalization for Speaker-independent Silent Speech Recognition Callier Center for Communication Disorders Department of Computer Science & Engineering Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders. 2014; 1179–1183.
- 60. Denby B, Schultz T, Honda K, Hueber T, Gilbert JM, Brumberg JS. Silent speech interfaces. Speech Commun. Elsevier B.V.; 2010; 52: 270–287.
- 61. Wand M, Schulte C, Janke M, Schultz T. Array-based Electromyographic Silent Speech Interface. 6th International Conference on Bio-inspired Systems and Signal Processing. 2013.
- 62. Cler MJ, Nieto-Castanon a, Guenther FH, Stepp CE. Surface electromyographic control of speech synthesis. Eng Med Biol Soc (EMBC), 2014 36th Annu Int Conf IEEE. 2014; 5848–5851.
- 63. Hueber T, Bailly G. Statistical conversion of silent articulation into audible speech using full-covariance HMM. Comput Speech Lang. 2016; 36: 274–293.
- 64. Hueber T., Benaroya E.L., Chollet G., Denby B., Dreyfus G., Stone M., (2010) "Development of a Silent Speech Interface Driven by Ultrasound and Optical Images of the Tongue and Lips", Speech Communication, 52(4), pp. 288–300.

