ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 11 March 2021 doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.645952

[Figure 1]

# Data Augmentation: Using Channel-Level Recombination to Improve Classiﬁcation Performance for Motor Imagery EEG

Yu Pei1,2, Zhiguo Luo2,3, Ye Yan2,3, Huijiong Yan2,3, Jing Jiang4, Weiguo Li1, Liang Xie2,3* and Erwei Yin2,3

1 School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China, 2 Tianjin Artiﬁcial Intelligence Innovation Center (TAIIC), Tianjin, China, 3 Unmanned Systems Research Center, National Innovation Institute of Defense Technology, Academy of Military Sciences China, Beijing, China, 4 National Key Laboratory of Human Factors Engineering, China Astronaut Research and Training Center, Beijing, China

The quality and quantity of training data are crucial to the performance of a deep-learning-based brain-computer interface (BCI) system. However, it is not practical to record EEG data over several long calibration sessions. A promising time- and cost-efﬁcient solution is artiﬁcial data generation or data augmentation (DA). Here, we proposed a DA method for the motor imagery (MI) EEG signal called brain-area-recombination (BAR). For the BAR, each sample was ﬁrst separated into two ones (named half-sample) by left/right brain channels, and the artiﬁcial samples were generated by recombining the half-samples. We then designed two schemas (intra- and adaptive-subject schema) corresponding to the single- and multi-subject scenarios. Extensive experiments using the classiﬁer of EEGnet were conducted on two public datasets under various training set sizes. In both schemas, the BAR method can make the EEGnet have a better performance of classiﬁcation (p < 0.01). To make a comparative investigation, we selected two common DA methods (noise-added and ﬂipping), and the BAR method beat them (p < 0.05). Further, using the proposed BAR for augmentation, EEGnet achieved up to 8.3% improvement than a typical decoding algorithm CSP-SVM (p < 0.01), note that both the models were trained on the augmented dataset. This study shows that BAR usage can signiﬁcantly improve the classiﬁcation ability of deep learning to MI-EEG signals. To a certain extent, it may promote the development of deep learning technology in the ﬁeld of BCI.

Edited by:

Minkyu Ahn, Handong Global University,

South Korea Reviewed by:

Minpeng Xu, Tianjin University, China

Jing Jin, East China University of Science and Technology, China

*Correspondence:

Liang Xie xielnudt@gmail.com

Specialty section: This article was submitted to

Brain-Computer Interfaces,

a section of the journal Frontiers in Human Neuroscience

Received: 24 December 2020 Accepted: 17 February 2021 Published: 11 March 2021

Keywords: brain-computer interface, electroencephalogram, motor imagery, deep learning, inter-subject transfer learning, pre-training, data augmentation

Citation: Pei Y, Luo Z, Yan Y, Yan H, Jiang J,

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Li W, Xie L and Yin E (2021) Data Augmentation: Using Channel-Level

The brain-computer interface (BCI) is a communication control system directly established between the brain and external devices (computers or other electronic devices), using signals generated during brain activity (Wolpaw et al., 2000). Instead of relying on the muscles and organs, the system directly builds communication between the brain and the machine. Electroencephalogram (EEG) is one of the most common signals used for building a BCI

Recombination to Improve Classiﬁcation Performance for Motor

Imagery EEG. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 15:645952. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.645952

system because of its cost-eﬀectiveness, non-invasive implementation, and portability. BCIs have shown potentials in applying various ﬁelds such as communication, control, and rehabilitation (Abdulkader et al., 2015).

Recent years have witnessed intense researches into diﬀerent types of BCI systems. According to the signal acquisition method, BCI technology can be divided into three types: nonimplantable system, semi-implantable system, an implantable system (Wolpaw et al., 2000). Non-implantable BCI systems mainly use EEG to recognize human’s intention. According to the signal generation mechanism, BCI systems can be divided into induced BCI systems and spontaneous BCI systems. The induced BCI systems are: steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEP) (Friman et al., 2007; Ko et al., 2020), slow cortical potentials (Beuchat et al., 2013), and the P300 (Yin et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2017; Chikara and Ko, 2019), and the spontaneous BCI systems are: motor imagery (MI) (Choi and Cichocki, 2008; Belkacem et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020).

The motor imagery (MI) BCI system’s framework is based on the fact that the brain’s activity in a speciﬁc area will be changed when the patients (or subjects) imagine moving any part of their bodies. For example, when a person imagines moving his/her right arm, there is a desynchronization of neural activity in the primary motor cortex on the left side of the brain. This desynchronization is called event-related desynchronization (ERD), which can be observed in the EEG signals transitioning from resting-state energy level to a lower energy level. The spatial location, temporal onset, amount of decrease, and ERD’s stability are all subject-dependent factors (McFarland et al., 2000; Lotze and Halsband, 2006), bringing challenges for detecting changes in MI’s neural activity.

In recent years, based on the considerable amount of data and sophisticated model structure, deep learning has been proved its strong learning ability to classify linguistic features, images, and sounds (Zhong et al., 2015; Song et al., 2017; Alom et al., 2018; Cooney et al., 2019). However, it is diﬃcult to collect suﬃcient data in practice due to the limited available subjects, experimental time, and operation complexity in BCI. This problem is pronounced in MI-based BCI. The performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) is susceptible to the number of samples. A small scale dataset often leads to poor generalization during model training, reducing the decoding accuracy (LeCun et al., 2015).

A feasible approach to improve deep networks’ performance and to avoid the overﬁtting caused by lack of training data is data augmentation (DA) methods (Salamon and Bello, 2017). These methods augment training data by artiﬁcially generating new samples based on existing data (Roy et al., 2019). Yin and Zhang (2017) added Gaussian white noise to the EEG feature vector to improve their deep learning model’s accuracy on the classiﬁcation task of Mental Workload (MW). Sakai et al. (2017) shifted EEG trials in time axis and ampliﬁed the amplitude to generate artiﬁcial EEG signals for augmentation. The results showed that their augmentation method improved the classiﬁcation performance when the training set’s size was 20, but this method has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the more extensive training set. In another work, artiﬁcial EEG trials

were generated by segmentation and recombination in time and frequency domains (Lotte, 2015), and the results were more convincing. Other studies have used more advanced techniques such as variational auto-encoders (VAE) (Aznan et al., 2019) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). However, tens of thousands of parameters in these methods need to be trained using the original data, which creates a certain degree of demand for the original data scale. It is a conﬂict with our goal of data augmentation on a tiny training set. Besides, the huge consumption of computing resources and the diﬃculty of being reproduced are also their shortcomings, although they have achieved a certain degree of success in some aspects (Karras et al., 2017; Kodali et al., 2017).

We proposed a new motor imagery EEG DA method, called Brain Area Recombination (BAR), which ﬁrst decomposes the training dataset from the left and right brains and reassembles them into a new training dataset. Pre-training on the datasets of other subjects is also a common way to solve the insuﬃcient training of deep neural networks (Fahimi et al., 2020). There are two types of pre-training, one is to use the source subjects’ data in the same dataset as the pre-training training dataset, and the other is to use another dataset as the pre-training training dataset (Xu et al., 2020). The ﬁrst type of pre-training is used in our study. Fortunately, experiments show that our method can be well-embedded with the pre-training framework to improve the deep learning network’s classiﬁcation performance.

Compared with the methods above, the proposed BAR has the following advantages:

- (1) Low computational complexity;
- (2) High and ﬁxed expansion ratio;
- (3) Great quality of new artiﬁcial samples.

This paper’s remainder is organized as follows: section 2 introduced the public dataset used in the study. Section 3 proposed a preliminary experiment and our method’s hypothesis in detail and then introduced the method’s mathematical deﬁnition. We used two common schemas to evaluate our method and implemented the other two common DA methods as a comparison. Experiment results were showed in section 4, which demonstrated that the proposed BAR had achieved signiﬁcant results. Section 5 presented the discussion. Section 6 concluded the study.

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 2.1. Materials

Dataset 1: The ﬁrst dataset was from BCI-Competition-III-IVa and was collected in a cue-based setting. Only cues for the classes “right” and “foot” are provided. This dataset was recorded from ﬁve healthy subjects (aa, al, av, aw, ay) at 100 Hz. The subjects sat in a comfortable chair with arms resting on armrests. The timeline of the dataset was shown in Figure 1A. The raw data were continuous signals of 118 EEG channels and markers that indicate the time points of 280 cues. Each sample was segmented from [0, 2.5] s by marks, then passed a band-pass ﬁlter (5order Butterworth digital ﬁlter with cut-oﬀ frequencies at [8, 30] Hz) to remove muscle artifacts, line-noise contamination,

|[Figure 2]<br><br>FIGURE 1 | Timeline of one trial in the dataset 1 (A) and dataset 2 (B).|
|---|

and DC drifts. Under the condition that the positive sample and the negative sample were balanced, 100 samples were randomly selected as the training pool. The remaining samples were used as the test samples. The details of the competition, including ethical approval, and the raw data can be download from http://www. bbci.de/competition/iii/.

Dataset 2: The second dataset was from BCI-CompetitionIV-1. The dataset was recorded from seven healthy subjects (a, b, c, d, e, f, g), including four healthy individuals (named “a,”

- “b,” “f,” “g”) and three artiﬁcially generated “participants” (named
- “c,” “d,” “e”). 59-channel EEG signals were recorded at 100 Hz. Two motor imagery classes were selected for each subject from the three classes: left hand, right hand, and foot. The timeline of the dataset was shown in Figure 1B. There were two subjects (a, f) whose motor imaging tasks were diﬀerent from the others, so they were eliminated. Here we only used the calibration data because of the complete marker information. Each sample was segmented from [0, 2.5] s by marks, then passed a band-pass ﬁlter (5-order Butterworth digital ﬁlter with cut-oﬀ frequencies at [8, 30] Hz) to remove muscle artifacts, line-noise contamination, and DC drifts. After preprocessing, we obtained 200 samples for each subject. We randomly selected 100 samples as a training pool and the rest as test samples, like dataset 1. The details of the competition, including ethical approval, and the raw data can be download from http://www.bbci.de/competition/iv/.

2.2. Methods

2.2.1. Core Assumption

Consider that we select two samples from the original samples randomly, and take out the left brain part of the ﬁrst sample and the right brain part of the second sample, and recombine these two parts together to form an artiﬁcial sample. This artiﬁcial sample is still a normal EEG sample (1).

If xi,xj ∼ PMI−EEG, Then xˆ =

xi(R) xj(L)

∼ PMI−EEG (1)

where xi,xj ∈ RC×T, C is the number of electrodes, T is the sample-points, PMI−EEG is the distribution of MI-EEG data. x(R),x(L) ∈ RC2 ×T represent samples containing only the right brain channels and the left brain channels, respectively.

2.2.2. Brain Area Recombination

Based on the assumption described in (1), we propose two similar DA methods for single-subject and multi-subject scenes for EEG of motor imagination. The whole framework of our proposed method was shown in Figure 2.

For the single-subject scene, the data augmentation method is:

Nc

Esingle(s) =

{x(R)|x(R) ∈ D(sR),y(x(R)) = c}

c=1

×{x(L)|x(L) ∈ D(sL),y(x(L)) = c} (2) For the multi-subject scene, the data augmentation method is:

Ns

Emulti(s) =

i,j =s

Nc

{x(R)|x(R) ∈ D(iR),y(x(R)) = c}

c=1

×{x(L)|x(L) ∈ D(jL),y(x(L)) = c} (3)

where Ns and Nc represent the number of subjects and the number of classiﬁcation tasks, respectively. y(·) is a mapping to

get the label. s is the index of the subject. D(iR) and D(iL) represent the training dataset from the right brain and the left brain for

the i-th subject, respectively. “×” was deﬁned as the cartesianlike product operator. For example, there are two matrix sets A = {a1,a2},B = {b1,b2} and their product C = A × B = {

- a1
- b1

a1 b2

a2 b1

- a2
- b2

}. Note that Emulti(s) does not contain any sample from the s-th subject. In other words, it is a cross-subject training dataset. Figure 2A represents the meaning of Equation (2) and Figure 2B represents the meaning of Equation (3). The zero midline electrodes are Fpz, Fz, FCz, Cz, CPz, Pz, POz, and

,

,

,

|[Figure 3]<br><br>FIGURE 2 | Illustration of the Equation (2) (A) and Equation (3) (B).|
|---|

Oz in dataset 1. We alternately divide them into two sets in turn. Speciﬁcally, Fpz, FCz, CPz, and Pz are selected to be the brain’s left part, and Fz, Cz, Pz, Oz were are selected to be the brain’s right part. In dataset 2, the zero midline electrodes are Fz, FCz, Cz, CPz, and Pz. Fz, Cz, and Pz are selected to be the brain’s left part. FCz and CPz were are selected to be the brain’s right part.

- 2.2.3. Noise-Added and Flipping The problem we want to solve is data augmentation on a tiny training dataset. Methods like GANs and VAEs having massive parameters to be learned are not suitable for this situation. Moreover, considering that the no-parameter (or few parameters) methods will often achieve better results for this situation, we selected noise-added and ﬂipping methods for comparative investigation (Lashgari et al., 2020). Concerning the noise-added method, a Gaussian noise matrix with SNR (signal to noise ratio) of 5 is calculated, and then this noise matrix is added to the original sample. The rule of the ﬂipping DA method is to reverse each real sample in the time axis. Because the noise-added DA method does not have a ﬁxed expansion ratio constant, we have implemented two versions of the noise-added DA method for a more objective comparison. One implementation (version 1) makes the noise-added DA method have the same expansion ratio as the ﬂipping DA method. The other implementation (version 2) makes the noise-added DA method and the proposed BAR DA method have the same expansion ratio constant.

- 2.2.4. The EEGnet We use the end-to-end deep learning model, named EEGnet (Lawhern et al., 2018). The EEGnet takes the EEG segments as the input, passes them through three convolution layers for feature extraction, and uses a fully connected layer to classify. The ﬁrst layer is a temporal convolution to learn frequency ﬁlters. The second layer is a depthwise convolution layer. This layer connects to each feature map individually and learns frequencyspeciﬁc spatial ﬁlters. The third layer is a separable convolution layer. The separable convolution is a combination of depthwise convolution, which learns a temporal summary for each feature map individually, followed by a pointwise convolution, which learns how to mix the feature maps optimally. All feature maps are ﬂattened and are fed into a fully connected layer. Full details about the network architecture can be found in the opensource project: https://github.com/vlawhern/arl-eegmodels. In this study, we use the default hyperparameters provided by the open-source project.
- 2.2.5. The Common Spatial Patterns Extraction Due to the strong spatial distribution characteristics of motor imagery EEG signals, a feature extraction method called Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) is designed (Koles et al., 1990). The CSP aims to construct spatial ﬁlters which can maximize the variance of band-pass ﬁltered EEG signals from one class and minimize the variance of EEG signals from the other class (Lotte et al., 2018). Formally, CSP uses the spatial ﬁlters w to assign a

|[Figure 4]<br><br>FIGURE 3 | Workﬂows for IS-schema and AS-schema. Panel (A) is the workﬂow of intra-subject-schema and panel (B) is the workﬂow of adaptive-subject-schema.|
|---|

weight to each EEG sample channel. The w can be calculated by extremizing the following function:

w′X1′ X1w w′X2′ X2w

J(w) =

w′C1w w′C2w

=

(4)

By maximizing Equation (4), we can calculate the spatial ﬁlter focusing on class 1. Indeed, J(k × w) = J(w), with k a real constant, means that the rescaling of the w is arbitrary. To calculate the only maximizer, we need a condition that w′C2w = 1. Using the Lagrange multiplier method, the constrained optimization problem is equivalent to maximizing the following function:

L(λ,w) = w′C1w − λ(w′C2w − 1) (5)

The ﬁlters w maximizing L can be calculated by setting the derivative of L concerning w to 0:

∂L ∂w

= 2w′C1 − 2λw′C2 = 0 ⇔ C1w = λC2w ⇔ C2−1C1w = λw

(6)

We obtain an eigenvalue problem in Equation (6). Therefore, the spatial ﬁlters maximizing Equation (4) are the eigenvectors of M = C2−1C1 which correspond to its largest eigenvalue. Empirically, we select the eigenvectors corresponding to the top k(k = 3) eigenvalues and concatenate them into a matrix WN(1)

c×k. This matrix can capture the three components that most relate to class 1. For the class 2, we can swap the numerator and

denominator in the Equation (4) and repeat the above process. Finally, we concatenate the two matrices together to obtain the

CSP-feature extraction matrix W = WN(1)

c×k,WN(2)

c×k .

## 3. RESULTS

We designed two schemas to evaluate these DA methods. Both schemas used the same deep learning model called EEGnet (Lawhern et al., 2018). The setting of the dataset was diﬀerent between both schemas. In the ﬁrst schema, referred to as intrasubject(IS)-schema, each subject’s EEGnet was only trained on the subject’s own dataset. In the second schema, referred to as adaptive-subject(AS)-schema, each subject’s EEGnet should be trained in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, named the pretraining stage, the EEGnet should be trained on other subjects’ datasets. In the second stage, named the adaptive-training stage, the EEGnet should be trained on the target subject’s dataset. Figure 3 showed the two schemas’ workﬂow. We only used one DA method in each experiment instead of experimenting with multiple DA methods’ additive eﬀects. Two DA methods (noiseadded and ﬂipping) were implemented as reference methods (Lashgari et al., 2020). The ﬂipping DA method ﬂipped each sample along the time axis to generate a new sample. So this DA method can only get a double-sized dataset. The noise-added DA method added noise to each sample to generate new samples. Since the noise-added DA method had no ﬁxed expansion factor, we implemented two versions with diﬀerent expansion factors for the more objective comparison experiments. We repeated 10 times of experiments in each training set size for a speciﬁc subject.

|[Figure 5]<br><br>FIGURE 4 | Average subjects performance on different size of training dataset in the IS-schema and AS-schema from dataset 1 (A) and dataset 2 (B) was plotted. The red line with “NONE” in (A.1,A.2,B.1,B.2) indicates the case that the training set was not augmentated. The lines with “NOISE” and “NOISE_EX” represent version 1 of noise-added method and version 2 of the noise-added method, respectively. The green line and red line with the preﬁx “ADA_” in (A.3,B.3) represent AS-schema’s accuracies. The blue line and yellow line in (A.3,B.3) represent IS-schema’s accuracies.|
|---|

|[Figure 6]<br><br>FIGURE 5 | Individual result in IS-schema (A) and AS-schema (B). Note that the green bar (“CSPSVM”) in (A) is the traditional classiﬁer’s result using the BAR method. The bar named “NOISE” represents the version 2 of noise-added method.|
|---|

- TABLE 1 | Paired-sample t-test result on the test accuracy in Figures 4A.1,B.1.

Dataset 1 FLIP NOISE NONE NOISE_EX BAR 1 × 10−4 2 × 10−3 1 × 10−5 2 × 10−3 Dataset 2 FLIP NOISE NONE NOISE_EX

- BAR 1 × 10−4 8 × 10−6 6 × 10−7 2.6 × 10−3

TABLE 2 | Paired-sample t-test result on the test accuracy in Figures 4A.2,B.2.

Dataset 1 FLIP NOISE NONE NOISE_EX

- BAR 2 × 10−4 2 × 10−3 4 × 10−3 5 × 10−2

Dataset 2 FLIP NOISE NONE NOISE_EX BAR 9 × 10−5 3 × 10−4 6 × 10−7 1.2 × 10−3

TABLE 3 | Paired-sample t-test result on the test accuracy in Figure 5.

IS-schema FLIP NOISE NONE CSPSVM

- BAR 3 × 10−3 7.2 × 10−3 3 × 10−4 1.5 × 10−2

AS-schema FLIP NOISE NONE BAR 2.3 × 10−2 9.9 × 10−4 5.2 × 10−3

- 3.1. IS-Schema Performance

There were multiple subjects in each dataset. For the sth subject, we ﬁrst randomly selected some samples to construct

the original-training dataset Ds. The augmentation methods were applied to the Ds in turn to construct the corresponding augmented training datasets. The EEGnet was trained on these training datasets separately and was tested on the testing dataset. To test the proposed BAR’s sensitivity to the training dataset’s size, we conducted extensive experiments on diﬀerent training dataset sizes. For a speciﬁc subject, we repeated the experiment 10 times on a speciﬁc training set size from 10 to 100 and then took the averaged accuracy as the ﬁnal one. The results of those experiments were plotted in Figures 4A.1,B.1, 5A. Figures 4A.1,B.1 shown the performance of each DA method under diﬀerent training set sizes. This performance was the average result of all subjects. For dataset 1, as the size of the training set increases, all DA methods’ performance is improving, but our BAR method is always ahead of other methods by about 3%, except for the case where the training set size is

10. Figure 5A shown the performance of each DA method on diﬀerent subjects. These accuracies come from the averaged accuracy of all experiments. For a speciﬁc subject, we run many experiments on diﬀerent training set sizes from 10 to 100, and all accuracies are averaged to be the ﬁnal one. A paired-sample t-test was used to measure the signiﬁcance of our proposed BAR, and the results were shown in Tables 1, 3. The test results were p < 0.005 between the referenced methods and the proposed method.

- 3.2. AS-Schema Performance In the AS-schema: For each subject, we selected the same samples randomly from other subjects to construct the training dataset. In this schema, two training sets were needed, and the EEGnet was trained on them as Figure 3 shows. The ﬁrst dataset was

a cross-subject dataset which is constructed by (3) for the sth subject. The second dataset was constructed by (2), which was the same as the training dataset in the intra-subject schema. For the ﬂipping method, we ﬁrst mix the source subjects’ data and then ﬂip each sample in this mixed dataset to obtain a new artiﬁcial sample. For the noise-added method, we have two versions of strategies. Version 1: We ﬁrst mix the source subjects’ data and then add gaussian noise to each sample in this mixed dataset to obtain a new artiﬁcial sample. Version 2: We randomly select an original sample with replacement from the source subjects’ mixed data and add Gaussian noise to it to obtain a new artiﬁcial sample. Repeat the process until the original samples, and the artiﬁcial samples are equals to the augmented dataset by the BAR. To investigate our proposed BAR’s performance in diﬀerent sizes of selected samples for each subject, we run the adaptive-subject experiment many times in each size of selected samples. The result was demonstrated in Figures 4A.2,B.2, 5B. Figures 4A.2,B.2 shown the performance of each DA method under diﬀerent training set sizes. This performance was the average result of all subjects. For dataset 1 and dataset 2, as the training set size increases, all DA methods’ performance increases, but our BAR method has always been ahead of other methods except for a few cases. Figure 5B shown the performance of each DA method on diﬀerent subjects. These accuracies come from the averaged accuracy of all experiments. For a speciﬁc subject, we run a lot of experiments on diﬀerent training set sizes from 10 to 100, and all accuracies are averaged to be the ﬁnal one. A Paired-sample t-test was used to measure our proposed BAR’s signiﬁcance, and the result was shown in Tables 2, 3. The test results were p < 0.05 between the referenced methods and the proposed method.

- 3.3. EEGnet vs. CSP-SVM The CSP-SVM, a traditional classiﬁer for MI-EEG signals, does not support the AS-schema. Therefore, we can only compare the performance of EEGnet and CSP-SVM in IS-schema. The results were plotted in Figure 6. The training set and testing set were the same as those used by EEGnet. In Figure 6A, our BAR method enabled EEGnet to obtain a huge improvement in classiﬁcation performance compared to CSP-SVM. In Figure 6B, the improvement of classiﬁcation performance was not obvious, but it still exceeded the performance of traditional CSP-SVM. This showed that our method can enable deep learning models

|[Figure 7]<br><br>FIGURE 6 | EEGnet vs. CSP-SVM on dataset 1 (A) and dataset 2 (B).|
|---|

|[Figure 8]<br><br>FIGURE 7 | The red points were artiﬁcial samples by the proposed BAR and the blue ones were sampled from the recording process. The star points (“*”) and circle points (“o”) represent the ﬁrst class and the second class samples, respectively.|
|---|

to be more fully trained, whether the quality of the dataset was poor or better, and the classiﬁcation performance exceeded the traditional method CSP-SVM’s.

- 3.4. Data Visualization It is interesting to visualize the locations of the EEG trials generated by our proposed BAR. We used t-Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) (Maaten and Hinton, 2008), a nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique that embeds highdimensional data in a two-or-three-dimensional space, to show and compare the original EEG trials and generated EEG trials in the intra-subject schema. Figure 7 shows the result of t-SNE on augmented training dataset from each subject, where the size of the training set we used is 20. An overall characteristic can be found that BAR’s generated EEG trials may not be scattered far away from the original EEG trials. Note that the subject d and subject e are artiﬁcially generated “participants.” So that the artiﬁcial samples closely surround real samples, which is slightly diﬀerent from other subjects’.

- 3.5. Experimental Setup We used ubuntu 18.04.5 LTS with a GPU TITAN V as the experiment platform. We chose 60 epochs determined by our iterated experiments for early stopping. We set the batch size to 16. Adam optimizer was used in all experiments with lr = 0.001,β1 = 0.9,β2 = 0.999.
- 4. DISCUSSION

This article developed a new DA method to generate artiﬁcial EEG data from the recorded samples. These artiﬁcial data can be used to supplement the training set, which can improve the EEGnet’s decoding accuracy. The human brain is composed of two parts, the left hemisphere and the right hemisphere. Many studies have shown cooperative relationships between brain areas under speciﬁc tasks (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010). We believe that the motor imagery induced EEG patterns contain three parts: the left hemibrain independent component, the right hemibrain independent component, and the left and right brain cooperative

components. Moreover, our data augmentation method may strengthen the left and right brain collaboration components through channel-level reorganization and constructs its more robust training samples. We designed two schemas toward two application scenarios: single-subject scenario and multisubjects scenario. We have demonstrated that the augmented datasets signiﬁcantly improved the performance of detection in deep-learning-based MI-BCI systems. Furthermore, we reimplemented the noise-added method and the ﬂipping method, known as common DA methods for time series data (Wen et al., 2020). The results showed that the proposed BAR signiﬁcantly outperformed them in the MI-EEG classiﬁcation task. Although the ﬁnal binary classiﬁcation accuracy has not improved much, it is a reliable improvement because it passed the t-test.

Merely expanding the size of the training dataset can improve the classiﬁcation performance of the deep learning network. To get a more objective conclusion, the expansion ratio of the noiseadded DA method was set to be the same as our proposed BAR’s. Moreover, the results were plotted in Figure 4, which illustrated that with the help of our proposed BAR method, the EEGnet had been more fully trained to achieve the best classiﬁcation performance. We found that as the size of the training set increases, the classiﬁcation accuracy of deep learning increases very quickly at the beginning. After a certain threshold, the increase rate will slow down. In the Figures 4A.1,A.2 the threshold is 20. In the Figures 4B.1 the threshold is 40. In the Figure 4B.2 the threshold is 70.

The ﬂipping method destroyed the time-domain characteristics of EEG signals. Comparing Figures 4A.1,A.2, we found that the performance of the ﬂipping method had dropped. In these two schemas, the only diﬀerence was that EEGnet was pre-trained in the mixed dataset of multiple subjects in the second schema. The spatial distribution characteristics of datasets mixed by multiple subjects would be reduced by the diﬀerences between subjects (Ang et al., 2008). Therefore, training EEGnet on a multi-subject mixed data would force the model to pay more attention to temporal features. However, the temporal features had been destroyed by the ﬂipping method’s operation in the time axis. EEGnet would perform worse in the AS-schema if the ﬂipping DA method was used. This result was also consistent with prior knowledge that the two important dimensions of motor imaging EEG signal characteristics were space and time (Sakhavi et al., 2018).

The noise-added method was diﬃcult to tune. We implemented two versions for the comparative experiments. One version had the same expansion ratio as the ﬂip method, and the other version had the same expansion ratio as our proposed BAR method. In our experiment, the noise-added method was not adjusted to the optimal state. The tuning process of the noise-added method was complicated and required massive experiments. There were too many factors aﬀecting the noise-added method’s performance, such as the type of noise distribution, the signal-to-noise ratio, and the ratio of the generated data volume, original data volume, etc.

The BAR may promote the application of advanced DA methods such as GANs in the BCI ﬁeld. After long-term development, the Generative Adversarial Network had evolved

various variants, improving the training process’s stability and the diversity of the generated samples (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al., 2015; Isola et al., 2017). Nevertheless, its essence was still a deep generative model that contained two deep modules (generator and discriminator), which included massive parameters to be learned (Gui et al., 2020). To obtain a generator with superior performance, a certain amount of data was needed to support generator and discriminator adversarial training. Still, the motivation for data augmentation in the BCI ﬁeld was that we did not have enough real training data. This was a conﬂict. Therefore, when the original dataset’s size was very small, using advanced methods such as GAN for data augmentation was not a good choice. However, our method was parameterless, and experiments proved that it can still enhance the deep-learningbased classiﬁer under a small training set size. So, we want to say that our method may help GANs to improve their performance. In other words, the BAR may be a parameterless DA method that can assist the parameterized DA method.

Although AS-schema was dependent on the dataset, the DA method we proposed can improve the deep learning model’s classiﬁcation performance. The viewpoint that AS-schema was dependent on the dataset can be understanding by comparing the red line and the orange line in Figures 4A.3,B.3. As can be seen from Figure 4, the data quality of dataset 1 was better than that of dataset 2. The improvement eﬀect of AS-schema on the dataset recorded from the high-quality subjects was more obvious. With the augmentation of our method, the deep learning model can improve the dataset with many poor subjects, which can be seen in Figure 4B.3. On dataset 1 with the better overall quality, our method can further improve the classiﬁcation performance of deep learning models. The green line beat the others in Figure 4A.3.

DA method was not eﬀective for CSP-SVM (traditional methods), but it was eﬀective for EEGnet (deep learning methods). Two facts may explain the phenomenon. The perspective of features: In the traditional CSP-SVM framework, the features are extracted by the CSP algorithm. Although These features are highly explainable, they are too simple to reﬂect the data’s original appearance. However, the deep-learningbased classiﬁer is an end-to-end method, and the features are automatically learned from the massive training samples. These features, which are learned by many samples, often reﬂect more information of the original data. The perspective of non-linear ﬁtting ability: The non-linear ﬁtting ability of the SVM comes from the kernel function. Choosing a suitable kernel function is very dependent on experience (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995). However, the non-linear ﬁtting ability of the deep-learningbased classiﬁer is automatically learned from the massive training samples. Many facts have proved that data-driven non-linear expression capabilities are often better than that of manually selected kernel functions in recent years.

An interesting phenomenon discovered by comparing Tables 1, 2 was that the signiﬁcance of the proposed BAR was reduced in dataset 1. The reason for the result may be that the size of the training set was enough to train a good neural network in the AS-schema. In the pre-training stage, our neural network was ﬁrst trained on data from other subjects. The amount of data

in this stage was large enough to make the neural network to converge to a not bad point. So the eﬀect of our proposed BAR will be reduced in the pre-training schema.

This article has several limitations that call for future investigation. (1) For multi subjects, we use the pre-training pipeline, which is an approach relying on experience stem from natural language processing (NLP) (Xipeng et al., 2020). Experiments show that this pipeline is not completely suitable for the BCI ﬁeld. It is worth seeking the best way to transfer knowledge from other subjects to the target subject. (2) Inﬂuenced by the phenomenon of ERD and ERS, we choose the left brain part and the right brain part as the region to be divided and be recombined. Although we demonstrate this divided approach’s eﬀectiveness by extensive experiments, the optimal dividend approach is a crucial problem for the channelwise-recombined DA method. (3) Through a large number of artiﬁcial samples obtained by the BAR in a short time, these samples have a large number of redundant samples. They contain countless repetitive information, which will signiﬁcantly reduce the training speed of the model. Selecting high-quality samples from artiﬁcially generated samples has become a problem, which would become a potential application scenario for active learning (Settles, 2009). These questions will guide our next research direction.

## 5. CONCLUSION

In this study, a data augmentation method (denoted as BAR) based channel-level recombination was proposed for MI-BCI systems. In our method, to obtain an augmented training set, we divided each sample into two samples according to the brain region to which the channel belongs and then regroup them in the same category. After that, the EEGnet was trained on the augmented training set. Two common DA methods were implemented as comparisons in two training schemas to verify the proposed BAR method. All comparative experimental results passed the paired-sample t-test, which fully demonstrated our proposed BAR’s eﬀectiveness. At the same time, we found that

AS-schema was dependent on the dataset. It performed well on

- dataset 1 but badly on dataset 2. One possible reason was that
- dataset 2 was of poor quality, and AS-schema did not apply. How to match the AS-schema with a poor quality dataset will be our next research direction. In bad situations, our method can still improve the decoding performance of deep learning models. The proposed BAR may promote the application of deep learning technology in BCI systems.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author/s.

## ETHICS STATEMENT

Ethical review and approval was not required for the study on human participants in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements. Written informed consent for participation was not required for this study in accordance with the national legislation and the institutional requirements.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

YP and LX: conceptualization. YP: methodology, data curation, and writing—original draft preparation. HY: software, formal analysis, and visualization. YP, ZL, and YY: validation. YP and JJ: investigation. EY: resources and funding acquisition. YP, ZL, and LX: writing—review and editing. YY and WL: supervision. YP and LX: project administration. All authors: contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

## FUNDING

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 61901505).

## REFERENCES

Abdulkader, S. N., Atia, A., and Mostafa, M.-S. M. (2015). Brain computer interfacing: applications and challenges. Egypt. Inform. J. 16, 213–230. doi: 10.1016/j.eij.2015.06.002

Alom, M. Z., Taha, T. M., Yakopcic, C., Westberg, S., Sidike, P., Nasrin, M. S., et al. (2018). The history began from alexnet: a comprehensive survey on deep learning approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01164.

Ang, K. K., Chin, Z. Y., Zhang, H., and Guan, C. (2008). “Filter bank common spatial pattern (FBCSP) in brain-computer interface,” in 2008 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence) (Singapore: IEEE), 2390–2397.

Aznan, N. K. N., Atapour-Abarghouei, A., Bonner, S., Connolly, J. D., Al Moubayed, N., and Breckon, T. P. (2019). “Simulating brain signals: Creating synthetic EEG data via neural-based generative models for improved SSVEP classiﬁcation,” in 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) (Durham: IEEE), 1–8. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2019.8852227

Belkacem, A. N., Nishio, S., Suzuki, T., Ishiguro, H., and Hirata, M. (2018). Neuromagnetic decoding of simultaneous bilateral hand movements for

multidimensional brain-machine interfaces. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 26, 1301–1310. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2018.2837003

Beuchat, N. J., Chavarriaga, R., Degallier, S., and Millán, J. D. R. (2013). “Oﬄine decoding of upper limb muscle synergies from EEG slow cortical potentials,” in 2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) (Lausanne: Swiss Federal Institute of Technology), 3594–3597. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610320

Chen, C., Zhang, J., Belkacem, A. N., Zhang, S., Xu, R., Hao, B., et al. (2019). G-causality brain connectivity diﬀerences of ﬁnger movements between motor execution and motor imagery. J. Healthcare Eng. 2019. doi: 10.1155/2019/5068283 Available online at: https://www.hindawi.com/ journals/jhe/2019/5068283/

Chikara, R. K., and Ko, L.-W. (2019). Neural activities classiﬁcation of human inhibitory control using hierarchical model. Sensors 19:3791. doi: 10.3390/s19173791

Choi, K., and Cichocki, A. (2008). “Control of a wheelchair by motor imagery in real time,” in International Conference on Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning (Springer), 330–337. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-889 06-9_42

Cooney, C., Folli, R., and Coyle, D. (2019). “Optimizing layers improves cnn generalization and transfer learning for imagined speech decoding from EEG,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC) (Derry: IEEE), 1311–1316. doi: 10.1109/SMC.2019.8914246

Cortes, C., and Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn. 20, 273–297. doi: 10.1007/BF00994018

Fahimi, F., Dosen, S., Ang, K. K., Mrachacz-Kersting, N., and Guan, C. (2020). Generative adversarial networks-based data augmentation for brain-computer interface. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3016666

Friman, O., Volosyak, I., and Graser, A. (2007). Multiple channel detection of steady-state visual evoked potentials for brain-computer interfaces. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 54, 742–750. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2006.889160

Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., et al. (2014). “Generative adversarial nets,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (Montreal, QC: NIPS 2014), 2672–2680.

Gui, J., Sun, Z., Wen, Y., Tao, D., and Ye, J. (2020). A review on generative adversarial networks: algorithms, theory, and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06937.

Isola, P., Zhu, J.-Y., Zhou, T., and Efros, A. A. (2017). “Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (Los Angeles, CA: IEEE), 1125–1134. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.632

Karras, T., Aila, T., Laine, S., and Lehtinen, J. (2017). Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196.

Ko, L.-W., Chikara, R. K., Lee, Y.-C., and Lin, W.-C. (2020). Exploration of user’s mental state changes during performing brain-computer interface. Sensors 20:3169. doi: 10.3390/s20113169

Kodali, N., Abernethy, J., Hays, J., and Kira, Z. (2017). On convergence and stability of gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07215.

Koles, Z. J., Lazar, M. S., and Zhou, S. Z. (1990). Spatial patterns underlying population diﬀerences in the background EEG. Brain Topogr. 2, 275–284. doi: 10.1007/BF01129656

Lashgari, E., Liang, D., and Maoz, U. (2020). Data augmentation for deeplearning-based electroencephalography. J. Neurosci. Methods 346:108885. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2020.108885

Lawhern, V. J., Solon, A. J., Waytowich, N. R., Gordon, S. M., Hung, C. P., and Lance, B. J. (2018). EEGnet: a compact convolutional neural network for EEG-based brain-computer interfaces. J. Neural Eng. 15:056013. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aace8c

LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444. doi: 10.1038/nature14539

Lotte, F. (2015). Signal processing approaches to minimize or suppress calibration time in oscillatory activity-based brain-computer interfaces. Proc. IEEE 103, 871–890. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2015.2404941

Lotte, F., Bougrain, L., Cichocki, A., Clerc, M., Congedo, M., Rakotomamonjy, A., et al. (2018). A review of classiﬁcation algorithms for eeg-based brain-computer interfaces: a 10 year update. J. Neural Eng. 15:031005. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aab2f2

Lotze, M., and Halsband, U. (2006). Motor imagery. J. Physiol. 99, 386–395. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.03.012 Maaten, L. V. D., and Hinton, G. (2008). Visualizing data using t-sne. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9, 2579–2605.

McFarland, D. J., Miner, L. A., Vaughan, T. M., and Wolpaw, J. R. (2000). Mu and beta rhythm topographies during motor imagery and actual movements. Brain Topogr. 12, 177–186. doi: 10.1023/A:1023437823106

Radford, A., Metz, L., and Chintala, S. (2015). Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434.

Roy, Y., Banville, H., Albuquerque, I., Gramfort, A., Falk, T. H., and Faubert, J. (2019). Deep learning-based electroencephalography analysis: a systematic review. J. Neural Eng. 16:051001. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ab260c

Rubinov, M., and Sporns, O. (2010). Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage 52, 1059–1069. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.003

Sakai, A., Minoda, Y., and Morikawa, K. (2017). “Data augmentation methods for machine-learning-based classiﬁcation of bio-signals,” in 2017 10th Biomedical Engineering International Conference (BMEiCON) (Tokyo), 1–4. doi: 10.1109/BMEiCON.2017.8229109

Sakhavi, S., Guan, C., and Yan, S. (2018). Learning temporal information for braincomputer interface using convolutional neural networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 29, 5619–5629. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2018.2789927

Salamon, J., and Bello, J. P. (2017). Deep convolutional neural networks and data augmentation for environmental sound classiﬁcation. IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 24, 279–283. doi: 10.1109/LSP.2017.2657381

Settles, B. (2009). Active Learning Literature Survey. Technical report, Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Song, X., Shibasaki, R., Yuan, N. J., Xie, X., Li, T., and Adachi, R. (2017). DeepMOB: learning deep knowledge of human emergency behavior and mobility from big and heterogeneous data. ACM Trans. Inform. Syst. 35, 1–19. doi: 10.1145/3057280

Wang, K., Xu, M., Wang, Y., Zhang, S., Chen, L., and Ming, D. (2020). Enhance decoding of pre-movement eeg patterns for brain-computer interfaces. J. Neural Eng. 17:016033. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ab598f

Wen, Q., Sun, L., Song, X., Gao, J., Wang, X., and Xu, H. (2020). Time series data augmentation for deep learning: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12478. Wolpaw, J. R., Birbaumer, N., Heetderks, W. J., McFarland, D. J., Peckham, P. H., Schalk, G., et al. (2000). Brain-computer interface technology: a review of the ﬁrst international meeting. IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 8, 164–173. doi: 10.1109/TRE.2000.847807

Xipeng, Q., TianXiang, S., Yige, X., Yunfan, S., Ning, D., and Xuanjing, H. (2020). Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey. Science China Technological Sciences.

Xu, L., Xu, M., Ke, Y., An, X., Liu, S., and Ming, D. (2020). Cross-dataset variability problem in eeg decoding with deep learning. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 14:103. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.00103

Yin, E., Zeyl, T., Saab, R., Hu, D., Zhou, Z., and Chau, T. (2016). An auditory-tactile visual saccade-independent p300 brain-computer interface. Int. J. Neural Syst. 26:1650001. doi: 10.1142/S0129065716500015

Yin, Z., and Zhang, J. (2017). Cross-subject recognition of operator functional states via EEG and switching deep belief networks with adaptive weights. Neurocomputing 260, 349–366. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2017. 05.002

Yu, Y., Zhou, Z., Liu, Y., Jiang, J., Yin, E., Zhang, N., et al. (2017). Selfpaced operation of a wheelchair based on a hybrid brain-computer interface combining motor imagery and p300 potential. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 25, 2516–2526. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2017.2766365

Zhong, Z., Jin, L., and Xie, Z. (2015). “High performance oﬄine handwritten Chinese character recognition using googlenet and directional feature maps,” in 2015 13th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR) (Shanghai: IEEE), 846–850. doi: 10.1109/ICDAR.2015.73 33881

Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2021 Pei, Luo, Yan, Yan, Jiang, Li, Xie and Yin. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

