REVIEW published: 26 April 2022 doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.867281

[Figure 1]

# A State-of-the-Art Review of EEG-Based Imagined Speech Decoding

Diego Lopez-Bernal*, David Balderas, Pedro Ponce and Arturo Molina

Tecnologico de Monterrey, National Department of Research, Mexico City, Mexico

Currently, the most used method to measure brain activity under a non-invasive procedure is the electroencephalogram (EEG). This is because of its high temporal resolution, ease of use, and safety. These signals can be used under a Brain Computer Interface (BCI) framework, which can be implemented to provide a new communication channel to people that are unable to speak due to motor disabilities or other neurological diseases. Nevertheless, EEG-based BCI systems have presented challenges to be implemented in real life situations for imagined speech recognition due to the difﬁculty to interpret EEG signals because of their low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). As consequence, in order to help the researcher make a wise decision when approaching this problem, we offer a review article that sums the main ﬁndings of the most relevant studies on this subject since 2009. This review focuses mainly on the pre-processing, feature extraction, and classiﬁcation techniques used by several authors, as well as the target vocabulary. Furthermore, we propose ideas that may be useful for future work in order to achieve a practical application of EEG-based BCI systems toward imagined speech decoding.

Edited by:

Hiram Ponce, Universidad Panamericana, Mexico

Reviewed by: Juan Humberto Sossa, Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), Mexico

Keywords: EEG, BCI, review, imagined speech, artiﬁcial intelligence

Yaqi Chu, Shenyang Institute of Automation

(CAS), China

## 1. INTRODUCTION

*Correspondence: Diego Lopez-Bernal

One of the main technological objectives in our current era is to generate a connected environment in which humans can be able to create a link between their daily and real life physical activities and the virtual world (Chopra et al., 2019). This type of applications are currently developed under a framework denominated as Future Internet (FI). There is a wide range of technological implementations that can beneﬁt from FI, such as human-computer interaction and usability (Haji et al., 2020). For example, speech driven applications such as Siri and Google Voice Search are widely used in our daily life to interact with electronic devices (Herﬀ and Schultz, 2016). These applications are based on a speech recognition algorithm, which allows the device to convert human voice to text. Nevertheless, there are certain health issues that may impede some people from using these applications.

lopezbernal.d@tec.mx

Specialty section: This article was submitted to

Brain-Computer Interfaces,

a section of the journal Frontiers in Human Neuroscience

Received: 31 January 2022 Accepted: 24 March 2022 Published: 26 April 2022

Verbal communication loss can be caused by injuries and neurodegenerative diseases that aﬀect the motor production, speech articulation, and language understanding. Few examples of these health issues include stroke, trauma, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Branco et al., 2021). In some cases, these neurodegenerative conditions may lead patients to fall into a lockedin syndrome (LIS), in which they are not capable to communicate due to the complete loss of motor control.

Citation: Lopez-Bernal D, Balderas D, Ponce P

and Molina A (2022) A State-of-the-Art Review of EEG-Based

Imagined Speech Decoding. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 16:867281. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.867281

To address this problem, Brain Computer Interfaces (BCI) have been proposed as an assistive technology to provide a new communication channel for those individuals with LIS. BCI technologies oﬀer a bridge between the brain and outer world, in such a way that it creates a bi-directional communication interface which reads the signals generated by the human brain and converts them into the desired cognitive task (Gu et al., 2021; Rasheed, 2021; Torres-García et al., 2022). In such manner, a thought-to-speech interface can be implemented so that people who are not able to speak due to motor disabilities can use their brain signals to communicate without the need of moving any body part.

Generally speaking, BCI for imagined speech recognition can be decomposed into four steps:

- 1. Signal acquisition: this step involves a deep understanding of the properties of the signals that are being recorded, as well as how the signals are going to be captured.
- 2. Pre-processing: the main objective of this step is to unmask and enhance the information and patterns within the signal.
- 3. Feature extraction: this step involves the extraction of the main characteristics of the signal.
- 4. Classiﬁcation: this is the ﬁnal step, in the diﬀerent mental states are classiﬁed depending on their features.

Several methods, both invasive and non-invasive, have been proposed and studied in order to acquire the signals that the brain produce during the speech imagining process. Some of these methods are magnetoencephalography (MEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), functional nearinfrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), electrocardiography (ECOG), and electroencelography (EEG) (Sereshkeh et al., 2018; Angrick et al., 2019; Dash et al., 2020b; Fonken et al., 2020; Si et al., 2021). Invasive methods, such as ECOG, have proven to provide, in average, greater classifying accuracies than non-invasive methods (MEG, fMRI, fNIRS, and EEG) during imagined speech decoding. In fact, invasive techniques have more easily exceeded the threshold for practical BCI imagined speech application (70%), in contrast to non-invasive techniques (Sereshkeh et al.,

- 2018). Among the mentioned techniques for imagined speech recognition, EEG is the most commonly accepted method due to its high temporal resolution, low cost, safety, and portability (Saminu et al., 2021). Nevertheless, speech-based BCI systems using EEG are still in their infancy due to several challenges they have presented in order to be applied to solve real life problems.

One of the main challenges that imagined speech EEG signals present is their low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). This low SNR cause the component of interest of the signal to be diﬃcult to recognize from the background brain activity given by muscle or organs activity, eye movements, or blinks. Furthermore, even EEG equipment is sensitive enough to capture electrical line noise from the surroundings (Bozhkov and Georgieva, 2018). Moreover, despite EEG having high temporal resolution, it lacks from spatial resolution which can lead to low accuracy on the source of information on the brain cortex, distortion of topographical maps by removing high spatial frequency, and diﬃculty to reject artifacts from the main signal (Kwon et al.,

2019). Because of these issues, classical machine learning (ML) methods that have proven to be successful in the recognition of motor imagery tasks have not obtained good performance when applied to imagined speech recognition. Thus, deep learning (DL) algorithms, along with various ﬁltering and feature extraction techniques, have been proposed to enhance the performance of EEG-based BCI systems (Antoniades et al., 2016).

That being said, imagined speech recognition has proven to be a diﬃcult task to achieve within an acceptable range of classiﬁcation accuracy. Therefore, in order to help researchers to take the best decisions when approaching this problem, the main objective of the present review is to provide an insight about the basics behind EEG-based BCI systems and the most recent research about their application toward imagined speech decoding, as well as the most relevant ﬁndings on this area. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 investigates the current applications of BCI systems and their classiﬁcation. Section 3 discusses the characteristics of electroencephalography (EEG) and the diﬀerent frequency bands that can be found in it. Section 4 presents the diﬀerent prompts that have been studied in literature; while Sections 5, 6, and 7 discuss about the pre-processing, feature extraction and classiﬁcation techniques, respectively. Section 8 oﬀers a summary of the reviewed works and techniques. Finally, Section 9 presents the ﬁndings of this work and proposes future directions for the improvement of imagined speech recognition.

## 2. BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE

The advent of Future Internet has caused a widespread connectivity between everyday electronic devices and the human body (Zhang et al., 2018). One example is Brain Computer Interface, which is a technology that uses brain activity and signals to create a communication channel between external electronic devices and the human brain (Abiri et al., 2019). BCI has been used for several applications in various areas, as shown in Figure 1. For example, BCI systems have been applied toward neuromarketing, security, entertainment, smart-environment control, emotional education, among others (Abdulkader et al., 2015; Abo-Zahhad et al., 2015; Aricò et al., 2018; Padﬁeld et al.,

- 2019; Mudgal et al., 2020; Suhaimi et al., 2020; Moctezuma and Molinas, 2022). One of the most explored applications of BCI is toward the medical area to treat and diagnose neurological disorders such as epilepsy, depression, dementia, Alzheimer’s, brain stroke, among others (Subasi, 2007; Morooka et al., 2018; Saad Zaghloul and Bayoumi, 2019; Hashimoto et al., 2020; Rajagopal et al., 2020; Sani et al., 2021). Moreover, it has also been used to recognize and classify emotions (Kaur et al., 2018; Suhaimi et al., 2020) and sleep stages (Chen et al., 2018), as well as to bring the opportunity of performing normal movements to people with motor disabilities (Antelis et al., 2018; Attallah et al.,
- 2020; Al-Saegh et al., 2021; Mattioli et al., 2022). Furthermore, one of the most interesting, yet diﬃcult, tasks that are being tried to be accomplished using BCI is imagined speech recognition, in which the objective is to convert the input brain signal to text, sound, or control commands. Diﬀerent types of BCI systems have

|[Figure 2]<br><br>FIGURE 1 | Technology map of BCI applications.|
|---|

been proposed by researchers to be able to use them in real-life scenarios. Some of the most important BCI classiﬁcations are: synchronous vs. asynchronous, online vs. oﬄine, exogenous vs. endogenous, invasive vs. non-invasive (Portillo-Lara et al., 2021).

Synchronous BCI are systems that cannot be used freely by the users because they are ﬁxed in determined periods of time. This means that, for imagined speech decoding, the user needs a cue that indicates when to begin the imagination process. Then, the selected time window is analyzed, discarding any other EEG signals that do not belong to that time constraint. On the other hand, asynchronous BCI can be used without any time constraint and they do not need any cue, meaning that it is a more natural process that can be more practical toward real-life applications. However, these systems have shown less accuracy than synchronous ones because of the diﬃculty on distinguishing intentional mental activity from unintentional one (Han et al., 2020).

Among BCI classiﬁcation, there are also online and oﬄine systems. Online BCI, just as asynchronous BCI, are promising toward real-life applications because they allow real-time data processing. In other words, during an online setting, the feature extraction and classiﬁcation processes are done several times during each trial. However, because of this same advantage, the computational complexity that an online system can employ is limited. On the other hand, oﬄine systems do not have this problem as they can use as much computational resources as needed because the feature extraction and classiﬁcation processes are done until all trails are available and the sessions are over. Nevertheless, because of this same reason, an oﬄine BCI system will be hardly applied under real-life circumstances (Chevallier et al., 2018).

Depending of the type of stimulus that the BCI uses, there can be exogenous and endogenous systems. Exogenous ones use external stimulus to generate the desired neural activation; while

endogenous ones can operate independently of any stimulus. For a real-life application of imagined speech decoding, the most appropriate between these two systems would be the endogenous BCI (Lee et al., 2021a).

Brain computer interfaces can also be classiﬁed as invasive and non-invasive. The invasive techniques, despite oﬀering the best representation of the brain signals, have the risk of scaring brain tissue, at the same time that are more costly and diﬃcult to use. On the other hand, non-invasive techniques, such as EEG, are used through scanning sensors or electrodes ﬁxed on the scalp to record the brain signals. Due to its easiness to use, its portability and its safety, EEG based BCI have been broadly explored to be applied toward imagined speech recognition.

## 3. ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG)

Electroencephalography, also known as EEG, is the most common non-invasive method to measure the electrical activity of the human brain. The signals are acquired by electrodes placed over the scalp that record the voltage diﬀerence generated during neural communication (Singh and Gumaste, 2021). The electrodes are then connected to an ampliﬁer and are typically distributed in a standard 10–20 placement (Sazgar and Young, 2019). Commonly, EEG systems consist of 14–64 electrodes (also called channels), thus creating a multi-dimensional signal.

Along with its easiness to use and safety, EEG also has a high temporal resolution, characteristics that make it the most suitable option for imagined speech recognition. The reason behind this is that the analysis of imagined speech signals requires to track how the signal changes over time. However, one of the main disadvantages of EEG is that it can be easily contaminated by surrounding noise caused by external electronic devices. Hence, before being able to analyze EEG waves for imagined speech

tasks, they must be pre-processed to enhance the most important information within the signal.

- 3.1. EEG Waves EEG waves consist of a mixture of diverse base frequencies. These frequencies have been arranged on ﬁve diﬀerent frequency bands: gamma (>35 Hz), beta (12–35 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), and delta (0.5–4 Hz) (Abhang et al., 2016). Each frequency band represents a determined cognitive state of the brain. Each of these frequency bands plays a determined role at the diﬀerent stages of speech processing. Thus, recognizing them may aid to better analyze the EEG signal.

- • Gamma waves. Changes in high gamma frequency (70–150 Hz) are associated with overt and covert speech. According to Pei et al. (2011), during overt speech the temporal lobe, Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area, premotor cortex and primary motor cortex present high gamma changes. On the other hand, this study also presents evidence of high gamma changes during covert speech in the supramarginal gyrus and superior temporal lobe.
- • Beta waves. These waves are often related with muscle movement and feedback. Therefore, it can be considered that they are involved during auditory tasks and speech production (Bowers et al., 2013).
- • Alpha waves. During language processing, these waves are involved in auditory feedback and speech perception. Moreover, alpha frequency during covert speech has been identiﬁed as weak in comparison to its behavior during overt speech (Jenson et al., 2014).
- • Theta waves. According to Kösem and Van Wassenhove

(2017), these waves become active during the phonemic restoration, and processing of co-articulation cues to compose words. Also, another study (Ten Oever and Sack, 2015), identiﬁed that theta waves can help to identify consonants in syllables.

- • Delta waves. Intonation and rhythm during speech perception have been found to fall into frequency ranges that belong to the lower delta oscillation band (Schroeder et al., 2008). Also, diverse studies have found other speech processes in which delta waves are involved, such as prosodic phrasing, syllable structure, long syllables, among others (Peelle

- et al., 2013; Ghitza, 2017; Molinaro and Lizarazu, 2018; Boucher et al., 2019).

- 4. IMAGINED SPEECH PROMPTS IN LITERATURE

As said in Section 2, the main objective of applying BCI toward imagined speech decoding is to oﬀer a new communication channel to people who are not able to speak due to any given motor disability. However, as language can be decomposed in several parts, as syllables, phonemes, vocals, and words, several studies have been carried on in order to classify these diﬀerent parts of language.

In D’Zmura et al. (2009), Brigham and Kumar (2010), and Deng et al. (2010), volunteers imagined two syllables, /ba/ and

/ku/. For these studies, the volunteers were given an auditory cue indicating the syllable to be imagined. Another study done by Callan et al. (2000) focused on the imagined speech process of /a/, /i/, and /u/ vowels during a metal rehearsing process after speaking them out loud. DaSalla et al. (2009) also studied /a/, and /u/ vowels using a visual cue for both of them. Those vowels were chosen because of them causing similar muscle activation during real speech production. Also, in a study done by Zhao and Rudzicz (2015) seven phonetic/syllabic prompts were classiﬁed during a covert speech production process. In more recent works (Jahangiri et al., 2018, 2019) four phonemic structures (/ba/, /fo/, /le/, and /ry/) were analyzed. The diﬀerence between these studies was that in Jahangiri et al. (2018) they used a visual cue, while in Jahangiri et al. (2019) it was an auditory one. Some other studies such as Cooney et al. (2019), Tamm et al. (2020), and Ghane and Hossain (2020) have analyzed EEG signals produced during the imagined speech process of ﬁve vowels: /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, and /u/. Besides phonemes, vowels, and syllables, there have been other studies that have worked with imagined words. For example, Wang et al. (2013) studied the classiﬁcation of two imagined Chinese characters, whose meanings were “left” and “one.” In González-Castañeda et al. (2017), a study was done to classify ﬁve diﬀerent imagined words: “up,” “down,” “left,” “right,” and “select.” Very similarly, the work done in Pawar and Dhage (2020) worked over the same prompts, with exception of the word “select.” Also, in the study done by Mohanchandra and Saha (2016), they used as prompts ﬁve words, being them, namely “water,” “help,” “thanks,” “food,” and “stop.” In Zhao and Rudzicz (2015), apart from the phonetic classiﬁcation, they also worked toward the classiﬁcation of the imagined words “pat,” “pot,” “knew,” and “gnaw”; where “pat”/“pot” and “knew”/“gnaw” are phonetically similar. Furthermore, in Nguyen et al. (2017) two diﬀerent groups of imagined words (short and long) were analyzed. The former consisted on the words “in,” “out,” and “up,” while the latter consisted on “cooperate” and “independent.”

5. PRE-PROCESSING TECHNIQUES IN LITERATURE

As mentioned previously, EEG signals can be easily contaminated by external noise coming from electrical devices and artifacts such as eye blinks, breathing, etc. In order to diminish the noise and increase the SNR of the EEG waves, several preprocess techniques have been proposed in literature. Moreover, pre-processing is important because it can help to reduce the computational complexity of the problem and, therefore, to improve the eﬃciency of the classiﬁer (Saminu et al., 2021). Generally speaking, pre-processing of EEG signals is usually formed by downsampling, band-pass, ﬁltering, and widowing (Roy et al., 2019). However, the steps may vary depending on the situation and the data quality. For example, in Hefron et al. (2018) the pre-processing consisted on trimming the trials, downsampling them to 512 Hz and 64 channels to reduce the complexity of the problem. Also, a high-pass ﬁlter was applied to the data, at the same time that the PREP (an standardized early-stage EEG processing) pipeline was used to

calculate an average reference and remove line noise. On the other hand, the work carried in Stober et al. (2015) only applied a single pre-processing step of channel rejection. In the works done by Saha et al. (2019a,b) they used channel cross-covariance (CCV) for pre-processing; while in Cooney et al. (2019) they employed independent component analysis (ICA). Common average reference (CAR) method has also been employed to improve SNR from EEG signals by removing information that is present in all electrodes simultaneously (Moctezuma et al.,

- 2019). Moreover, several studies have used temporal ﬁltering as pre-process technique to focus on speciﬁc frequencies among the EEG signals (Jahangiri et al., 2018; Koizumi et al., 2018; Jahangiri and Sepulveda, 2019; Pawar and Dhage, 2020). Another preprocessing technique that has been applied is Laplacian ﬁlter (Zhao and Rudzicz, 2015), which is a spatial ﬁlter. However, this type of ﬁlters is not commonly used because it can lead to loss of important EEG information. In fact, most of preprocessing techniques can lead to loss of information, besides requiring an extra computational cost. Therefore, end-to-end learning methods that require minimum pre-processing are of currently of interest in EEG classiﬁcation. However, classifying almost raw EEG signals is not an easy task and requires further study (Lee et al., 2020).

from multiple channels. Despite individual channel analysis being easier, extracting features from diverse channels at the same time is more useful because it helps to analyze how information is transferred between the diﬀerent areas of the brain. In order to do a simultaneous feature extraction, the most common method is the channel cross-covariance (CCV) matrix; in which the features of each channel are fused together to enhance the statistical relationship between the diﬀerent electrodes (Nguyen et al., 2017; Saha and Fels, 2019; Singh and Gumaste, 2021). In fact, Riemannian geometry is an advanced feature extraction technique that has been used to manipulate covariance matrices. It has been successfully applied toward several applications, such as motor imagery, sleep/respiratory states classiﬁcation, EEG decoding, etc. (Barachant et al., 2010, 2011; Navarro-Sune et al.,

- 2016; Yger et al., 2016; Chu et al., 2020).

7. CLASSIFICATION TECHNIQUES IN LITERATURE

In order to classify the features extracted from the EEG signal, researchers have used both classical machine learning and deep learning algorithms. Both of them are methods that provide computers the capacity of learning and recognizing patterns. In the case of BCI, the patterns to be recognized are the features extracted from the EEG waves, and then, based on what the computer learnt, some predictions are made in order to classify the signals. Several classical machine learning techniques have been used to approach imagined speech decoding for EEGbased BCI systems. Some on the most common algorithms include Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) (Chi et al., 2011; Song and Sepulveda, 2014; Lee et al., 2021b), Support Vector Machines (SVM) (DaSalla et al., 2009; García et al., 2012; Kim

- et al., 2013; Riaz et al., 2014; Sarmiento et al., 2014; Zhao and Rudzicz, 2015; Arjestan et al., 2016; González-Castañeda et al.,

2017; Hashim et al., 2017; Cooney et al., 2018; Moctezuma and Molinas, 2018; Agarwal and Kumar, 2021), Random Forests (RF) (González-Castañeda et al., 2017; Moctezuma and Molinas, 2018; Moctezuma et al., 2019), k-Nearest-Neighbors (kNN) (Riaz

- et al., 2014; Bakhshali et al., 2020; Agarwal and Kumar, 2021; Rao, 2021; Dash et al., 2022), Naive Bayes (Dash et al., 2020a; Agarwal and Kumar, 2021; Iliopoulos and Papasotiriou, 2021; Lee et al., 2021b), and Relevance Vector Machines (RVM) (Liang et al., 2006; Matsumoto and Hori, 2014). Furthermore, deep learning approaches have recently taken a huge role for imagined speech recognition. Some of these techniques are Deep Neural Networks (DBN) (Lee and Sim, 2015; Chengaiyan et al., 2020), Correlation Networks (CorrNet) (Sharon and Murthy, 2020), Standardization-Reﬁnement Domain Adaptation (SRDA) (Jiménez-Guarneros and Gómez-Gil, 2021), Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) (Pawar and Dhage, 2020), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) (Cooney et al., 2019, 2020; Tamm et al., 2020), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Chengaiyan et al., 2020), and parallel CNN+RNN with and without autoencoders autoencoders (Saha and Fels, 2019; Saha et al., 2019a,b; Kumar and Scheme, 2021).

6. FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES IN LITERATURE

During feature extraction, the main objective is to obtain the most relevant and signiﬁcant information that will aid to correctly classify the neural signals. This process can be carried on the time domain, frequency domain, and spatial domain. In the time domain, the feature extraction process is often done through statistical analysis, obtaining statistical features such as standard deviation (SD), root mean square (RMS), mean, variance, sum, maximum, minimum, Hjorth parameters, sample entropy, autoregressive (AR) coeﬃcients, among others (Riaz

- et al., 2014; Iqbal et al., 2016; AlSaleh et al., 2018; Cooney

- et al., 2018; Paul et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019). On the other hand, the most common methods used to extract features from the frequency domain include Mel Frequency Cepstral Coeﬃcients (MFCC), Short-Time Fourier transform (STFT), Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), Wavelet Transform (WT), Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT), and Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) (Riaz et al., 2014; Salinas, 2017; Cooney et al., 2018; García-Salinas et al., 2018; Panachakel et al., 2019; Pan et al., 2021). Additionally, there is a method called Bag-of-Features (BoF) proposed by Lin et al. (2012), in which a time-frequency analysis is done to convert the signal into words using Sumbolic Arregate approXimation (SAX). In the case of spatial domain analysis, the most common method used in several works is Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) (Brigham and Kumar, 2010; Riaz et al., 2014; Arjestan et al., 2016; AlSaleh et al., 2018; Lee
- et al., 2019; Panachakel et al., 2020). Moreover, it is important to mention that these feature extraction methods can be done in two diﬀerent ways: from individual channels and simultaneously

- TABLE 1 | Imagined speech classiﬁcation methods summary.

References Task Methods Brain area and waves Performance

D’Zmura et al.

- (2009)

Binary classiﬁcation /ba/ and /ku/ syllables

- - Hilbert transform - All with exception of 18 electrodes most sensitive to electromyographic artifact

61% Average accuracy

- - Matched ﬁlters -Alpha, beta, and theta waves

DaSalla et al. (2009) Binary classiﬁcation between /a/, /u/ and rest state

- CSP - All areas 71% Average accuracy

[-3mm] - SVM - 1–45 Hz bandpass Brigham and Kumar

- (2010)

Binary classiﬁcation /ba/ and /ku/ syllables

- - ICA - All with exception of 18 electrodes most sensitive to electromyographic artifact

68% Average accuracy

- - AR model - 4–25 Hz bandpass
- - KNN

Deng et al. (2010) Binary classiﬁcation /ba/ and /ku/ syllables

- SOBI algorithm - All areas 67% Average accuracy

[-3mm] - Hilbert spectrum - 3–20 Hz bandpass

- - FFT / STFT
- - LDA

Chi et al. (2011) Binary classiﬁcation of ﬁve phoneme classes

- - Naive Bayes - All areas omitting occipital and far frontal positions

72% Average accuracy

- - LDA - 4–28 Hz bandpass
- - Spectrogram

- TABLE 2 | Imagined speech classiﬁcation methods summary (continuation).

References Task Methods Brain area and waves Performance

García et al. (2012) Multi-class classiﬁcation of ﬁve words

Matsumoto and Hori

(2014)

Binary classiﬁcation of /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, and /u/ Japanese vowels

Sarmiento et al.

- (2014)

Binary classiﬁcation of /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, and /u/

- - ANOVA - Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area - 79% RVM Average
- - Power spectral density - 2–50 Hz bandpass accuracy
- - SVM

Riaz et al. (2014) Binary classiﬁcation of /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, and /u/

- - AR coefﬁcients - All areas 75% Average accuracy
- - Hidden Markov Model -Alpha and beta waves
- - KNN / SVM
- - CSP / MFCC / LDA

Zhao and Rudzicz

- (2015)

Binary classiﬁcation for presence of C/V, ± Nasal, ± Bilab,± /uw/, ± /iy/

- - Naive Bayes - Wernicke’s area 26% Average accuracy
- - SVM - -25 Hz bandpass
- - Random Forests

- - CSP - All areas - 79% RVM Average accuracy
- - RVM - 0.1–300 Hz bandpass - 77% SVM Average accuracy
- - SVM

- - DBN - T7, FT8, FC6, C5, C3, CP3, C4, CP5, CP1, P3

C/V: 18% Accuracy

- - SVM - 1–50 Hz bandpass ± Nasal: 63.5% Accuracy ± Bilab: 56.6% Accuracy ± /uw/: 59.6% Accuracy ± /iy/: 79.1% Accuracy

8. DISCUSSION, APPLICATIONS, AND LIMITATIONS OF PREVIOUS RESEARCH

Based on the previous sections and the diverse works mentioned in them, imagined speech classiﬁcation can be summed up as in Tables 1–6.

As observed in the previous tables, there have been diﬀerent attempts to achieve a good performance of imagined speech

recognition using EEG-based BCI. These attempts involve diverse feature extraction and classiﬁcation methods. Therefore, in Tables 7, 8 we oﬀer a summary of the advantages and disadvantages of some of these methods.

The main objective of most imagined speech decoding BCI is to provide a new communication channel for those who have partial or total movement impairment (Rezazadeh Sereshkeh et al., 2019). Nevertheless, besides speech restoration, there are

Arjestan et al. (2016) Binary classiﬁcation vowels, syllables, and resting state

- - CSP - All areas Vowels: 76.6% best accuracy
- - SVM - 8–45 Hz bandpass Syllables: 76.4% best accuracy

Sereshkeh et al.

- (2017)

Binary classiﬁcation of “yes,” “no,” and rest state

- - Multilayer perceptron - All areas 70% Average accuracy
- - DWT - 0–50 Hz bandpass
- - RMS / SD

Nguyen et al. (2017) Classiﬁcation of vowels, short, and long words

- - Riemannian Manifold - Broca’s area, the motor cortex and Wernicke’s area

- Vowels: 49% Average accuracy

- - RVM - 8–70 Hz bandpass - Short words: 50.1% Average accuracy
- - CSP / WT - Long words: 66.2% Average accuracy

- S-L: 80.1% Average accuracy

Paul et al. (2018) Classiﬁcation of three Hindi vowels

- - SVM - Broca’s and Wernicke’s area 63% Average accuracy
- - AR coefﬁcients - 0.1–36 Hz bandpass
- - Hjorth parameters
- - Sample entropy

- Cooney et al. (2018) Classiﬁcation of seven phonemic prompts and four words

- - SVM - All areas - Phonemes: 20% Average accuracy
- - Decision Tree - 1–50 Hz bandpass - Pair of words: 44%
- - MFCC Average accuracy
- - ICA

some other novel applications of imagined speech decoding that have been explored. In Kim et al. (2020), researchers proposed a BCI paradigm that combined event-related potentials and imagined speech to target individual objects in a smart home environment. This was done through EEG analysis and classiﬁcation using regularized linear discriminant analysis (RLDA). Moreover, the work presented in Asghari Bejestani et al. (2022) focused on the classiﬁcation of six Persian words through imagined speech decoding. These words, as said by the authors, can be used to control electronic devices such as a wheelchair or to ﬁll a simple questionnaire form. Tøttrup et al. (2019) explored the possibility of combining motor imagery and imagined speech recognition for controlling an external device through EEG-based BCI and random forest algorithm. Furthermore, the work presented by Moctezuma and Molinas

- (2018) explored the application of imagined speech decoding toward subject identiﬁcation using SVM.

prosthesis. However, the fact of those words being classiﬁed by EEG-based BCI systems that are oﬄine and synchronous makes the projects less scalable to real-life applications.

Also, it is important to mention that EEG-based BCI lacks from accuracy when compared with other methods such as ECoG and MEG. ECoG has been applied in several studies for either covert and overt speech decoding, achieving higher average accuracies than EEG-based BCI. For example, in Martin et al. (2016) imagined speech pairwise classiﬁcation reached an accuracy of 88.3% through ECoG recording. Kanas et al. (2014) presented a spatio-spectral feature clustering of ECoG recordings for syllable classiﬁcation, obtaining an accuracy of 98.8%. Also, a work performed by Zhang et al. (2012) obtained a 77.5% accuracy on the classiﬁcation of eight-character Chinese spoken sentences through the analysis of ECoG recordings. Moreover, in the work presented by Dash et al. (2019) MEG was used for phrase classiﬁcation, achieving a top accuracy of 95%. Finally, the study in Dash et al. (2020a) aimed to classify articulated and imagined speech on healthy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients. In this work the best articulation decoding accuracy for ALS patients was 87.78%, while for imagined decoding was 74.57%.

Regardless of the rising interest on EEG-based BCI for imagined speech recognition, the development of systems that are useful for real-life applications is still in its infancy. In the case of syllables, vowels, and phonemes, the limited amount of vocabulary that has been analyzed impedes the possibility of applying BCI to allow people to speak through their thoughts. Among all the reviewed proposals, the one that seems closer to be applied in real life is the classiﬁcation of words such as “up,” “down,” “left,” “right,” “forward,” “backward,” and “select.” The reason behind this is that those words can be used to control external devices such as a computer/cellphone screen and robotic

In summary, the past research allowed to observe the following current limitations of EEG-based BCI systems for imagined speech recognition:

• Limited vocabulary: Most of the reviewed studies focused on imagined vowels (/a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/, /ba/, /ku/) and words

Moctezuma and Molinas (2018)

Classiﬁcation of “up,” “down,” “right,” “left,” “select”

Saha and Fels

- (2019)

Classiﬁcation of vowels, short and long words

Saha et al. (2019a) Binary classiﬁcation for presence of C/V, ± Nasal, ± Bilab,± /uw/, ± /iy/

Panachakel et al.

- (2019)

Moctezuma et al.

- (2019)

Classiﬁcation of seven phonemic prompts and four words

Classiﬁcation of “up,” “down,” “right,” “left,” “select”

- - RF - All areas - RF: 64% Average accuracy
- - SVM - 1–50 Hz bandpass - SVM: 84% Average accuracy
- - Naive Bayes - Naive Bayes: 68% Average accuracy
- - KNN - KNN: 78% Average accuracy
- - EMD/IMF

- - CCV - All areas - Vowels: 72% Average accuracy
- - CNN + LSTM + DAE - Short words: 77% Average accuracy

- Long words: 79% Average accuracy

- - CCV - All areas - C/V: 85% Accuracy
- - CNN + TCNN + DAE ± Nasal: 73% Accuracy ± Bilab: 75% Accuracy ± /uw/: 82% Accuracy ± /iy/: 73% Accuracy

± Multiclass: 28% Accuracy

- - DNN - C4, FC3, FC1, F5, C3, F7, FT7, CZ, P3, T7, C5

- 57% Average accuracy

- - DWT - 1–50 Hz bandpass

- - RF - All areas - 93% Average accuracy
- - CAR - 0–64 Hz bandpass
- - DWT / Statistics

such as “right,” “left,” “up,” and “down.” This shows how far away we are from truly decode enough vocabulary for a real-life application of covert speech decoding.

- • Limited accuracy: Despite some works reaching +80% accuracy, this was achieved mostly for binary classiﬁcation. Multi-class classiﬁcation, which would be more viable for real-life application, demonstrated to have much lower classiﬁcation rates than binary tasks. It is important to notice that even binary accuracy decreases or increases depending on the nature of the task to be done (for example: long vs. short words compared to words of the same length).
- • Mental repetition of the prompt: The experimental design of most studies included the repeated imagination of the vowel, phoneme or word. This helps increasing the accuracy of the algorithm; however, mental repetition is not included on daily conversation tasks. Therefore, the design of some proposed experiments have low reliability when considering their practical application.
- • Acquisition system: Most of the reviewed works used a high-density EEG system, which may be diﬃcult to apply in real-life situations Also, almost no work reviewed in here deals with an online and asynchronous BCI system, which, as mentioned earlier, is the feasible BCI option for practical applications.

## 9. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The rapid development of the Future Internet framework has led to several new applications such as smart environments, autonomous monitoring of medical health, cloud computing, etc. (Zhang et al., 2019). Moreover, there are important future plans, such as Internet Plus and Industry 4.0, that require further integration of internet with other areas, such as medicine and economics. Therefore, technologies such as Brain Computer Interfaces seem to be promising areas to be explored and implemented to solve real-life problems.

Through this review, we analyzed works that involved EEG-based BCI systems directed toward imagined speech recognition. These works followed the decoding of imagined syllables, phonemes, vowels, and words. However, the study of each of those groups was individual, meaning that there was no work aiming to study vowels vs. words, phonemes vs. words, phonemes vs. vowels, etc. at the same time. Also, it is important to notice that each BCI was used for a single person, which would make diﬃcult the implementation of a general and globalized system. It seems that each individual would need to train their own BCI system in order to use it successfully.

- Cooney et al. (2019) Classiﬁcation of /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, and /u/

- - CNN - All areas - 34% Average accuracy
- - Transfer learning - 2–40 Hz bandpass

Sharon and Murthy

- (2020)

Binary classiﬁcation for presence of C/V, ± Nasal, ± Bilab,± /uw/, ± /iy/

- CorrNet - All areas C/V: 89% Accuracy

- 1-50 Hz bandpass ± Nasal: 76% Accuracy

± Bilab: 75% Accuracy ± /uw/: 82% Accuracy ± /iy/: 80% Accuracy

Bakhshali et al.

- (2020)

Binary classiﬁcation for presence of C/V, ± Nasal, ± Bilab,± /uw/, ± /iy/

- Riemannian distance - Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area C/V: 86% Accuracy

Binary Classiﬁcation of /pat/, /pot/, /gnaw/, and /knew/

- Correntropy Spectral Density

- 1–50 Hz bandpass ± Nasal: 72% Accuracy ± Bilab: 69% Accuracy ± /uw/: 84% Accuracy ± /iy/: 75% Accuracy ± Word binary classiﬁcation: 69% Average accuracy

Pawar and Dhage

(2020)

Muti-class and binary classiﬁcation of “left,” “right,” “up,” and “down”

- - Kernel ELM - All areas Multi-class: 49% best accuracy
- - Statistical features - Prefrontal cortex, Wernicke’s area, right inferior frontal gyrus, Broca’s area

Binary: 85% best accuracy

- - DWT - Prefrontal cortex, Wernicke’s area, right inferior frontal gyrus, Broca’s area, primary motor cortex
- - ICA - 0.5–128 Hz bandpass

- TABLE 6 | Imagined speech classiﬁcation methods summary (continuation).

References Task Methods Brain area and waves Performance

- Cooney et al. (2020) - Classiﬁcation of /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, and /u/

- Classiﬁcation of “left,” “right,” “up,” “down,” “forward,” “backward” (in Spanish)

Tamm et al. (2020) Classiﬁcation of ﬁve vowels and

six words Chengaiyan et al.

- (2020)

Vowel classiﬁcation - RNN - All areas - RNN: 72% Average accuracy

- DBN - 2–40 Hz bandpass - DBN: 80% Average accuracy

Jiménez-Guarneros and Gómez-Gil

- (2021)

Short and long words classiﬁcation

- CNN - All areas - Vowels: 35% best accuracy

- ICA/LDA - 2–40 Hz bandpass - Words: 30% best accuracy

- - CNN - F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, P4 - 24% Average accuracy
- - Transfer learning

- SRDA - All areas - Short: 61% Average accuracy

- Long: 63% Average accuracy

Another thing to take into account is that several languages have been analyzed, such as English, Spanish, Chinese, and Hindi. However, there is not a comprehensive study that evaluates the impact of how a method performs toward an speciﬁc language.

Regarding feature extraction methods, there have been a large amount of proposed techniques such as DWT, MFCC, STFT, CSP, Riemannian space, etc. On the other hand, the most studied classiﬁcation algorithm has been SVM, which is a classical

machine learning technique. Deep learning techniques such as CNN and RNN have also been explored by some authors. Despite deep learning showing promising accuracy improvements in comparison to classical ML, it is diﬃcult to fully exploit it because of the limited amount of data available to train DL algorithms.

Additionally, currently there is not deﬁnitive information regarding the most important EEG recording locations of imagined speech recognition. Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas are

- TABLE 7 | Comparison of feature extraction methods.

Method Advantages Disadvantages

AR - Good frequency resolution - Low performance when applied to non-stationary signals

- Limited spectral loss - The order of the model is difﬁcult to select FFT - Good performance when applied to stationary signals - High noise sensitivity

- - Appropriate for narrowband signals - Poor performance on non-stationary signals
- - Good speed for real-time applications - Weak spectral estimation

WT - Varying window size to analyze several frequencies - Proper mother wavelet selection is not trivial

- Good to analyze transient signal changes

- TABLE 8 | Comparison of classiﬁcation methods.

Method Advantages Disadvantages

KNN - Easy to understand and implement - Large storage capacity is needed

- Error susceptibility and sensitivity to irrelevant features SVM - Effective in high dimensional spaces - Poor performance on noisy and large datasets

- Relatively low storage capacity is needed LDA - Simple to understand and use - Requires a linear model ANN - Relatively high accuracy - Requires large datasets for it to be trained

- - Flexible and adaptable structure - High computational cost
- - Handles multidimensional data - Performance depends on several parameters, such as number of neurons and hidden layers

DL algorithms - Robustness for adaptation - Requires large datasets for it to perform well

- - In can be adapted to different problems through transfer learning - Need high computational resources
- - Features can be automatically deduced and tuned - Difﬁcult to implement for novices

well-known to be involved in speech production; however, some studies reviewed here showed that they are not the only zones that contain valuable information for covert speech decoding. Therefore, it seems a good idea to propose a method that helps selecting the EEG channels that better characterize a given task.

All things considered, we identiﬁed the following tasks as promising for the future development of EEG-based BCI systems for imagined speech decoding:

- • Broaden the existing datasets in such a way that deep learning techniques could be applied to their full extent. Moreover, explore and propose prompts that could be more easily applied to solve real-life problems.
- • Find and propose more varied prompts in order to enhance the diﬀerence between their EEG signatures and detect the most discriminative characteristic to enhance classiﬁcation. This can be done by employing diﬀerent rhythms, tones, overall structure, and language.
- • Explore how a same proposed method performs over diﬀerent languages.
- • Recognize the best feature extraction and machine learning techniques to improve classiﬁcation accuracy.

- At the same time, there is still room for improvement in the identiﬁcation of EEG frequency range that oﬀers the most valuable information.
- • Most of the current studies are oﬄine-synchronous BCI systems applied in healthy subjects. Also, most experiments are highly controlled in order to avoid artifacts. Therefore, there is room for further work in these areas.
- • Explore diﬀerent imagery processes, such as Visual Imagery (Ullah and Halim, 2021).

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

DL-B: formal analysis, investigation, methodology, and writingoriginal draft. PP and AM: resources. DB, PP, and AM: supervision, validation, and writing—review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

## FUNDING

This work was funded by Fondo para el ﬁnanciamiento para la publicación de Artículos Cientof Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education.

## REFERENCES

Abdulkader, S., Atia, A., and Mostafa, M. (2015). Brain computer interfacing: applications and challenges. Egypt. Inform. J. 16, 213–230. doi: 10.1016/j.eij.2015.06.002

Abhang, P. A., Gawali, B., and Mehrotra, S. C. (2016). Introduction to EEG-and Speech-Based Emotion Recognition. India: Academic Press. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-804490-2.00007-5

Abiri, R., Borhani, S., Sellers, E. W., Jiang, Y., and Zhao, X. (2019). A comprehensive review of eeg-based brain-computer interface paradigms. J. Neural Eng. 16:011001. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ aaf12e

Abo-Zahhad, M., Ahmed, S. M., and Abbas, S. N. (2015). State-ofthe-art methods and future perspectives for personal recognition based on electroencephalogram signals. IET Biometr. 4, 179–190. doi: 10.1049/iet-bmt.2014.0040

Agarwal, P., and Kumar, S. (2021). Transforming Imagined Thoughts Into Speech Using a Covariance-Based Subset Selection Method. NISCAIR-CSIR.

Al-Saegh, A., Dawwd, S. A., and Abdul-Jabbar, J. M. (2021). Deep learning for motor imagery EEG-based classiﬁcation: a review. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 63:102172. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2020.102172

AlSaleh, M., Moore, R., Christensen, H., and Arvaneh, M. (2018). “Discriminating between imagined speech and non-speech tasks using EEG,” in 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), (USA: IEEE) 1952–1955. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2018.8512681

Angrick, M., Herﬀ, C., Mugler, E., Tate, M. C., Slutzky, M. W., Krusienski, D. J., et al. (2019). Speech synthesis from ECOG using densely connected 3D convolutional neural networks. J. Neural Eng. 16:036019. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ab0c59

Antelis, J. M., Gudi no-Mendoza, B., Falcón, L. E., Sanchez-Ante, G., and Sossa, H. (2018). Dendrite morphological neural networks for motor task recognition from electroencephalographic signals. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 44, 12–24. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2018.03.010

Antoniades, A., Spyrou, L., Took, C. C., and Sanei, S. (2016). “Deep learning for epileptic intracranial EEG data,” in 2016 IEEE 26th International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), (Italy: IEEE) 1–6. doi: 10.1109/MLSP.2016.7738824

Aricó, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., Sciaraﬀa, N., and Babiloni, F. (2018). Passive BCI beyond the lab: current trends and future directions. Physiol. Measure. 39:08TR02. doi: 10.1088/1361-6579/aad57e

Arjestan, M. A., Vali, M., and Faradji, F. (2016). “Brain computer interface design and implementation to identify overt and covert speech,” in 2016 23rd Iranian Conference on Biomedical Engineering and 2016 1st International Iranian Conference on Biomedical Engineering (ICBME), (Iran) 59–63. doi: 10.1109/ICBME.2016.7890929

Asghari Bejestani, M., Khani, M., Naﬁsi, V., Darakeh, F., et al. (2022). Eeg-based multiword imagined speech classiﬁcation for Persian words. BioMed Res. Int. 2022:8333084. doi: 10.1155/2022/8333084

Attallah, O., Abougharbia, J., Tamazin, M., and Nasser, A. A. (2020). A BCI system based on motor imagery for assisting people with motor deﬁciencies in the limbs. Brain Sci. 10:864. doi: 10.3390/brainsci10110864

Bakhshali, M. A., Khademi, M., Ebrahimi-Moghadam, A., and Moghimi, S. (2020). EEG signal classiﬁcation of imagined speech based on Riemannian distance of correntropy spectral density. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 59:101899. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2020.101899

- Barachant, A., Bonnet, S., Congedo, M., and Jutten, C. (2010). “Riemannian geometry applied to BCI classiﬁcation,” in International Conference on Latent Variable Analysis and Signal Separation (Springer), (France: Springer) 629–636. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15995-4_78
- Barachant, A., Bonnet, S., Congedo, M., and Jutten, C. (2011). Multiclass brain-computer interface classiﬁcation by Riemannian geometry. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59, 920–928. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2011.2172210

Boucher, V. J., Gilbert, A. C., and Jemel, B. (2019). The role of low-frequency neural oscillations in speech processing: revisiting delta entrainment. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 31, 1205–1215. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01410

Bowers, A., Saltuklaroglu, T., Harkrider, A., and Cuellar, M. (2013). Suppression of the µ rhythm during speech and non-speech discrimination revealed by

independent component analysis: implications for sensorimotor integration in speech processing. PLoS ONE 8:e72024. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.007 2024

Bozhkov, L., and Georgieva, P. (2018). “Overview of deep learning architectures for EEG-based brain imaging,” in 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), (Brazil) 1–7. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2018.848 9561

Branco, M. P., Pels, E. G., Sars, R. H., Aarnoutse, E. J., Ramsey, N. F., Vansteensel, M. J., et al. (2021). Brain-computer interfaces for communication: preferences of individuals with locked-in syndrome. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 35, 267–279. doi: 10.1177/1545968321989331

Brigham, K., and Kumar, B. V. (2010). “Imagined speech classiﬁcation with EEG signals for silent communication: a preliminary investigation into synthetic telepathy,” in 2010 4th International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, (China) 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ICBBE.2010.5515807

Callan, D. E., Callan, A. M., Honda, K., and Masaki, S. (2000). Single-sweep EEG analysis of neural processes underlying perception and production of vowels. Cogn. Brain Res. 10, 173–176. doi: 10.1016/S0926-6410(00)00025-2

Chen, T., Huang, H., Pan, J., and Li, Y. (2018). “An EEG-based brain-computer interface for automatic sleep stage classiﬁcation,” in 2018 13th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA), (China: IEEE) 1988–1991. doi: 10.1109/ICIEA.2018.8398035

Chengaiyan, S., Retnapandian, A. S., and Anandan, K. (2020). Identiﬁcation of vowels in consonant-vowel-consonant words from speech imagery based EEG signals. Cogn. Neurodyn. 14, 1–19. doi: 10.1007/s11571-019-09558-5

Chevallier, S., Kalunga, E., Barth9lemy, Q., and Yger, F. (2018). Riemannian Classiﬁcation for SSVEP Based BCI: Oﬄine versus Online Implementations. Versailles: HAL. doi: 10.1201/9781351231954-19

Chi, X., Hagedorn, J. B., Schoonover, D., and D’Zmura, M. (2011). Eeg-based discrimination of imagined speech phonemes. Int. J. Bioelectromagn. 13, 201–206.

Chopra, K., Gupta, K., and Lambora, A. (2019). “Future internet: the internet of things-a literature review,” in 2019 International Conference on Machine Learning, Big Data, Cloud and Parallel Computing (COMITCon), (India) 135–139. doi: 10.1109/COMITCon.2019.8862269

Chu, Y., Zhao, X., Zou, Y., Xu, W., Song, G., Han, J., et al. (2020). Decoding multiclass motor imagery EEG from the same upper limb by combining Riemannian geometry features and partial least squares regression. J. Neural Eng. 17:046029. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aba7cd

- Cooney, C., Folli, R., and Coyle, D. (2018). “Mel frequency cepstral coeﬃcients enhance imagined speech decoding accuracy from EEG,” in 2018 29th Irish Signals and Systems Conference (ISSC), (United Kingdom) 1–7. doi: 10.1109/ISSC.2018.8585291
- Cooney, C., Folli, R., and Coyle, D. (2019). “Optimizing layers improves CNN generalization and transfer learning for imagined speech decoding from EEG,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC), (Italy) 1311–1316. doi: 10.1109/SMC.2019.8914246

Cooney, C., Korik, A., Folli, R., and Coyle, D. (2020). Evaluation of hyperparameter optimization in machine and deep learning methods for decoding imagined speech EEG. Sensors 20:4629. doi: 10.3390/s20164629

DaSalla, C. S., Kambara, H., Sato, M., and Koike, Y. (2009). Single-trial classiﬁcation of vowel speech imagery using common spatial patterns. Neural Netw. 22, 1334–1339. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2009.05.008

Dash, D., Ferrari, P., Heitzman, D., and Wang, J. (2019). “Decoding speech from single trial MEG signals using convolutional neural networks and transfer learning,” in 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), (Germany: IEEE) 5531–5535. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2019.8857874

Dash, D., Ferrari, P., Hernandez-Mulero, A. W., Heitzman, D., Austin, S. G., and Wang, J. (2020a). “Neural speech decoding for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,” in INTERSPEECH, (China) 2782–2786. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2020-3071

Dash, D., Ferrari, P., and Wang, J. (2020b). Decoding imagined and spoken phrases from non-invasive neural (MEG) signals. Front. Neurosci. 14:290. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00290

Dash, S., Tripathy, R. K., Panda, G., and Pachori, R. B. (2022). Automated recognition of imagined commands from EEG signals using multivariate fast and adaptive empirical mode decomposition based method. IEEE Sensors Lett. 6, 1–4. doi: 10.1109/LSENS.2022.3142349

Deng, S., Srinivasan, R., Lappas, T., and D’Zmura, M. (2010). EEG classiﬁcation of imagined syllable rhythm using Hilbert spectrum methods. J. Neural Eng. 7:046006. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/7/4/046006

D’Zmura, M., Deng, S., Lappas, T., Thorpe, S., and Srinivasan, R. (2009). “Toward EEG sensing of imagined speech,” in International Conference on HumanComputer Interaction (United States: Springer), 40–48. doi: 10.1007/978-3-64202574-7_5

Fonken, Y. M., Kam, J. W., and Knight, R. T. (2020). A diﬀerential role for human hippocampus in novelty and contextual processing: implications for p300. Psychophysiology 57:e13400. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13400

García, A. A. T., García, C. A. R., and Pineda, L. V. (2012). “Toward a silent speech interface based on unspoken speech,” in Biosignals, (Mexico) 370–373.

García-Salinas, J. S., Villase nor-Pineda, L., Reyes-García, C. A., and TorresGarcía, A. (2018). “Tensor decomposition for imagined speech discrimination in EEG,” in Mexican International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Mexico: Springer), 239–249. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-04497-8_20

Ghane, P., and Hossain, G. (2020). Learning patterns in imaginary vowels for an intelligent brain computer interface (BCI) design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12066. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2010.12066

Ghitza, O. (2017). Acoustic-driven delta rhythms as prosodic markers. Lang. Cogn. Neurosci. 32, 545–561. doi: 10.1080/23273798.2016.1232419

González-Casta neda, E. F., Torres-García, A. A., Reyes-García, C. A., and Villase nor-Pineda, L. (2017). Soniﬁcation and textiﬁcation: proposing methods for classifying unspoken words from EEG signals. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 37, 82–91. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2016.10.012

Gu, X., Cao, Z., Jolfaei, A., Xu, P., Wu, D., Jung, T.-P., et al. (2021). EEGbased brain-computer interfaces (BCIs): a survey of recent studies on signal sensing technologies and computational intelligence approaches and their applications. IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinformatics 18, 1645–1666. doi: 10.1109/TCBB.2021.3052811

Haji, L. M., Ahmad, O. M., Zeebaree, S., Dino, H. I., Zebari, R. R., and Shukur, H. M. (2020). Impact of cloud computing and internet of things on the future internet. Technol. Rep. Kansai Univ. 62, 2179–2190.

Han, C.-H., Müller, K.-R., and Hwang, H.-J. (2020). Brain-switches for asynchronous brain-computer interfaces: a systematic review. Electronics 9:422. doi: 10.3390/electronics9030422

Hashim, N., Ali, A., and Mohd-Isa, W.-N. (2017). “Word-based classiﬁcation of imagined speech using EEG,” in International Conference on Computational Science and Technology (Malaysia: Springer), 195–204. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-8276-4_19

Hashimoto, Y., Kakui, T., Ushiba, J., Liu, M., Kamada, K., and Ota, T. (2020). Portable rehabilitation system with brain-computer interface for inpatients with acute and subacute stroke: a feasibility study. Assist. Technol. 1–9. doi: 10.1080/10400435.2020.1836067

Hefron, R., Borghetti, B., Schubert Kabban, C., Christensen, J., and Estepp, J. (2018). Cross-participant eeg-based assessment of cognitive workload using multi-path convolutional recurrent neural networks. Sensors 18:1339. doi: 10.3390/s18051339

Herﬀ, C., and Schultz, T. (2016). Automatic speech recognition from neural signals: a focused review. Front. Neurosci. 10:429. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00429

Iliopoulos, A., and Papasotiriou, I. (2021). Functional complex networks based on operational architectonics: application on EEG-BCI for imagined speech. Neuroscience 484, 98–118. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.11.045

Iqbal, S., Shanir, P. M., Khan, Y. U., and Farooq, O. (2016). “Time domain analysis of EEG to classify imagined speech,” in Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Computer and Communication Technologies (India: Springer), 793–800. doi: 10.1007/978-81-322-2523-2_77

Jahangiri, A., Achanccaray, D., and Sepulveda, F. (2019). “A novel EEG-based four-class linguistic BCI,” in 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), (Germany: IEEE) 3050–3053. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2019.8856644

Jahangiri, A., Chau, J. M., Achanccaray, D. R., and Sepulveda, F. (2018). “Covert speech vs. motor imagery: a comparative study of class separability in identical environments,” in 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), (United States: IEEE) 2020–2023. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2018.8512724

Jahangiri, A., and Sepulveda, F. (2019). The relative contribution of highgamma linguistic processing stages of word production, and motor imagery of

articulation in class separability of covert speech tasks in EEG data. J. Med. Syst. 43, 1–9. doi: 10.1007/s10916-019-1379-1

Jenson, D., Bowers, A. L., Harkrider, A. W., Thornton, D., Cuellar, M., and Saltuklaroglu, T. (2014). Temporal dynamics of sensorimotor integration in speech perception and production: independent component analysis of EEG data. Front. Psychol. 5:656. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00656

Jiménez-Guarneros, M., and Gómez-Gil, P. (2021). Standardization-reﬁnement domain adaptation method for cross-subject EEG-based classiﬁcation in imagined speech recognition. Pattern Recogn. Lett. 141, 54–60. doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2020.11.013

Kanas, V. G., Mporas, I., Benz, H. L., Sgarbas, K. N., Bezerianos, A., and Crone, N. E. (2014). Joint spatial-spectral feature space clustering for speech activity detection from ECOG signals. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 61, 1241–1250. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2014.2298897

Kaur, B., Singh, D., and Roy, P. P. (2018). EEG based emotion classiﬁcation mechanism in BCI. Proc. Comput. Sci. 132, 752–758. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2018.05.087

Kim, H.-J., Lee, M.-H., and Lee, M. (2020). “A BCI based smart home system combined with event-related potentials and speech imagery task,” in 2020 8th International Winter Conference on Brain-Computer Interface (BCI), (Korea) 1–6. doi: 10.1109/BCI48061.2020.9061634

Kim, T., Lee, J., Choi, H., Lee, H., Kim, I.-Y., and Jang, D. P. (2013). “Meaning based covert speech classiﬁcation for brain-computer interface based on electroencephalography,” in 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), (United States: IEEE) 53–56. doi: 10.1109/NER.2013.6695869

Koizumi, K., Ueda, K., and Nakao, M. (2018). “Development of a cognitive brainmachine interface based on a visual imagery method,” in 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 1062–1065. (United States) doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2018.8512520

Kösem, A., and Van Wassenhove, V. (2017). Distinct contributions of lowand high-frequency neural oscillations to speech comprehension. Lang. Cogn. Neurosci. 32, 536–544. doi: 10.1080/23273798.2016.1238495

Kumar, P., and Scheme, E. (2021). “A deep spatio-temporal model for EEGbased imagined speech recognition,” in ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), (Canada: IEEE) 995–999. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413989

Kwon, M., Han, S., Kim, K., and Jun, S. C. (2019). Super-resolution for improving EEG spatial resolution using deep convolutional neural network-feasibility study. Sensors 19:5317. doi: 10.3390/s19235317

Lee, D.-H., Jeong, J.-H., Ahn, H.-J., and Lee, S.-W. (2021a). “Design of an EEGbased drone swarm control system using endogenous BCI paradigms,” in 2021 9th International Winter Conference on Brain-Computer Interface (BCI), (Korea) 1–5. doi: 10.1109/BCI51272.2021.9385356

Lee, D.-H., Kim, S.-J., and Lee, K.-W. (2021b). Decoding high-level imagined speech using attention-based deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.06922. doi: 10.1109/BCI53720.2022.9734310

Lee, D.-Y., Lee, M., and Lee, S.-W. (2020). “Classiﬁcation of imagined speech using siamese neural network,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), (Canada: IEEE) 2979–2984. doi: 10.1109/SMC42975.2020.9282982

- Lee, S.-H., Lee, M., and Lee, S.-W. (2019). “EEG representations of spatial and temporal features in imagined speech and overt speech,” in Asian Conference on Pattern Recognition (Korea: Springer), 387–400. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-41299-9_30
- Lee, T.-J., and Sim, K.-B. (2015). Vowel classiﬁcation of imagined speech in an electroencephalogram using the deep belief network. J. Instit. Control Robot. Syst. 21, 59–64. doi: 10.5302/J.ICROS.2015.14.0073

Liang, N.-Y., Huang, G.-B., Saratchandran, P., and Sundararajan, N. (2006). A fast and accurate online sequential learning algorithm for feedforward networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 17, 1411–1423. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2006. 880583

Lin, J., Khade, R., and Li, Y. (2012). Rotation-invariant similarity in time series using bag-of-patterns representation. J. Intell. Inform. Syst. 39, 287–315. doi: 10.1007/s10844-012-0196-5

Martin, S., Brunner, P., Iturrate, I., Millán, J. d. R., Schalk, G., Knight, R. T., et al.

(2016). Word pair classiﬁcation during imagined speech using direct brain recordings. Sci. Rep. 6, 1–12. doi: 10.1038/srep25803

Matsumoto, M., and Hori, J. (2014). Classiﬁcation of silent speech using support vector machine and relevance vector machine. Appl. Soft Comput. 20, 95–102. doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2013.10.023

Mattioli, F., Porcaro, C., and Baldassarre, G. (2022). A 1d cnn for high accuracy classiﬁcation and transfer learning in motor imagery EEG-based braincomputer interface. J. Neural Eng. 18:066053. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ac4430

Moctezuma, L. A., and Molinas, M. (2018). “EEG-based subjects identiﬁcation based on biometrics of imagined speech using EMD,” in International Conference on Brain Informatics (Norway: Springer), 458–467. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-05587-5_43

Moctezuma, L. A., and Molinas, M. (2022). “EEG-based subject identiﬁcation with multi-class classiﬁcation,” in Biosignal Processing and Classiﬁcation Using Computational Learning and Intelligence (Mexico: Elsevier), 293–306. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-820125-1.00027-0

Moctezuma, L. A., Torres-García, A. A., Villase nor-Pineda, L., and Carrillo, M.

(2019). Subjects identiﬁcation using eeg-recorded imagined speech. Expert Syst. Appl. 118, 201–208. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2018.10.004

Mohanchandra, K., and Saha, S. (2016). A communication paradigm using subvocalized speech: translating brain signals into speech. Augment. Hum. Res. 1, 1–14. doi: 10.1007/s41133-016-0001-z

Molinaro, N., and Lizarazu, M. (2018). Delta (but not theta)-band cortical entrainment involves speech-speciﬁc processing. Eur. J. Neurosci. 48, 2642–2650. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13811

Morooka, R., Tanaka, H., Umahara, T., Tsugawa, A., and Hanyu, H. (2018). “Cognitive function evaluation of dementia patients using p300 speller,” in International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics (Japan: Springer), 61–72. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-94866-9_6

Mudgal, S. K., Sharma, S. K., Chaturvedi, J., and Sharma, A. (2020). Brain computer interface advancement in neurosciences: applications and issues. Interdiscip. Neurosurg. 20:100694. doi: 10.1016/j.inat.2020.100694

Navarro-Sune, X., Hudson, A., Fallani, F. D. V., Martinerie, J., Witon, A., Pouget, P., et al. (2016). Riemannian geometry applied to detection of respiratory states from EEG signals: the basis for a brain-ventilator interface. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 64, 1138–1148. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2016.2592820

Nguyen, C. H., Karavas, G. K., and Artemiadis, P. (2017). Inferring imagined speech using EEG signals: a new approach using Riemannian manifold features. J. Neural Eng. 15:016002. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aa8235

Padﬁeld, N., Zabalza, J., Zhao, H., Masero, V., and Ren, J. (2019). eeg-based braincomputer interfaces using motor-imagery: techniques and challenges. Sensors 19:1423. doi: 10.3390/s19061423

Pan, C., Lai, Y.-H., and Chen, F. (2021). “The eﬀects of classiﬁcation method and electrode conﬁguration on eeg-based silent speech classiﬁcation,” in 2021 43rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), (Mexico: IEEE) 131–134. doi: 10.1109/EMBC46164.2021.9629709

- Panachakel, J. T., Ramakrishnan, A., and Ananthapadmanabha, T. (2019). “Decoding imagined speech using wavelet features and deep neural networks,” in 2019 IEEE 16th India Council International Conference (INDICON), (India: IEEE) 1–4. doi: 10.1109/INDICON47234.2019.9028925
- Panachakel, J. T., Ramakrishnan, A., and Ananthapadmanabha, T. (2020). A novel deep learning architecture for decoding imagined speech from EEG. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09374. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2003.09374

Paul, Y., Jaswal, R. A., and Kajal, S. (2018). “Classiﬁcation of EEG based imagine speech using time domain features,” in 2018 International Conference on Recent Innovations in Electrical, Electronics & Communication Engineering (ICRIEECE), (India) 2921–2924. doi: 10.1109/ICRIEECE44171.2018.9008572

Pawar, D., and Dhage, S. (2020). Multiclass covert speech classiﬁcation using extreme learning machine. Biomed. Eng. Lett. 10, 217–226. doi: 10.1007/s13534-020-00152-x

Peelle, J. E., Gross, J., and Davis, M. H. (2013). Phase-locked responses to speech in human auditory cortex are enhanced during comprehension. Cereb. Cortex 23, 1378–1387. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs118

Pei, X., Leuthardt, E. C., Gaona, C. M., Brunner, P., Wolpaw, J. R., and Schalk, G. (2011). Spatiotemporal dynamics of electrocorticographic high gamma activity during overt and covert word repetition. Neuroimage 54, 2960–2972. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.029

Portillo-Lara, R., Tahirbegi, B., Chapman, C. A., Goding, J. A., and Green, R. A. (2021). Mind the gap: state-of-the-art technologies and applications for EEGbased brain-computer interfaces. APL Bioeng. 5:031507. doi: 10.1063/5.0047237

Rajagopal, D., Hemanth, S., Yashaswini, N., Sachin, M., and Suryakanth, M. (2020). Detection of Alzheimer’s disease using BCI. Int. J. Prog. Res. Sci. Eng. 1, 184–190.

Rao, M. (2021). “Decoding imagined speech using wearable EEG headset for a single subject,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), (Unites States: IEEE) 2622–2627.

Rasheed, S. (2021). A review of the role of machine learning techniques towards brain-computer interface applications. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extract. 3, 835–862. doi: 10.3390/make3040042

Rezazadeh Sereshkeh, A., Youseﬁ, R., Wong, A. T., Rudzicz, F., and Chau, T. (2019). Development of a ternary hybrid fNIRS-EEG brain-computer interface based on imagined speech. Brain Comput. Interfaces 6, 128–140. doi: 10.1080/2326263X.2019.1698928

Riaz, A., Akhtar, S., Iftikhar, S., Khan, A. A., and Salman, A. (2014). “Inter comparison of classiﬁcation techniques for vowel speech imagery using EEG sensors,” in The 2014 2nd International Conference on Systems and Informatics (ICSAI 2014), (China) 712–717. doi: 10.1109/ICSAI.2014.7009378

Roy, Y., Banville, H., Albuquerque, I., Gramfort, A., Falk, T. H., and Faubert, J. (2019). Deep learning-based electroencephalography analysis: a systematic review. J. Neural Eng. 16:051001. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ab260c

Saad Zaghloul, Z., and Bayoumi, M. (2019). Early prediction of epilepsy seizures VLSI BCI system. arXiv e-prints: arXiv-1906. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1906.02894

Saha, P., Abdul-Mageed, M., and Fels, S. (2019a). Speak your mind! towards imagined speech recognition with hierarchical deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05746. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2019-3041

Saha, P., and Fels, S. (2019). Hierarchical deep feature learning for decoding imagined speech from EEG. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 33, 10019–10020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.330110019

Saha, P., Fels, S., and Abdul-Mageed, M. (2019b). “Deep learning the EEG manifold for phonological categorization from active thoughts,” in ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), (United Kingdom: IEEE) 2762–2766. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2019.8682330

Salinas, J. S. G. (2017). Bag of features for imagined speech classiﬁcation in electroencephalograms. Tesis de Maestría, Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y Electrónica. Available online at: https://inaoe.repositorioinstitucional. mx/jspui/bitstream/1009/1253/1/GarciaSJS.pdf

Saminu, S., Xu, G., Shuai, Z., Isselmou, A. E. K., Jabire, A. H., Karaye, I. A., et al. (2021). Electroencephalogram (EEG) based imagined speech decoding and recognition. J. Appl. Mat. Tech. 2, 74–84. doi: 10.31258/Jamt.2.2.74-84

Sani, O. G., Yang, Y., and Shanechi, M. M. (2021). Closed-loop bci for the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders. Brain Comput. Interface Res. 9:121. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60460-8_12

Sarmiento, L., Lorenzana, P., Cortes, C., Arcos, W., Bacca, J., and Tovar, A. (2014). “Brain computer interface (BCI) with EEG signals for automatic vowel recognition based on articulation mode,” in 5th ISSNIP-IEEE Biosignals and Biorobotics Conference, Biosignals and Robotics for Better and Safer Living (BRC), (Salvador: IEEE) 1–4. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/BRC.2014.6880997

Sazgar, M., and Young, M. G. (2019). “Overview of EEG, electrode placement, and montages,” in Absolute Epilepsy and EEG Rotation Review (Cham: Springer), 117–125. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-03511-2_5

Schroeder, C. E., Lakatos, P., Kajikawa, Y., Partan, S., and Puce, A. (2008). Neuronal oscillations and visual ampliﬁcation of speech. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 106–113. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.01.002

Sereshkeh, A. R., Trott, R., Bricout, A., and Chau, T. (2017). EEG classiﬁcation of covert speech using regularized neural networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process. 25, 2292–2300. doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2017.2758164

Sereshkeh, A. R., Youseﬁ, R., Wong, A. T., and Chau, T. (2018). Online classiﬁcation of imagined speech using functional near-infrared spectroscopy signals. J. Neural Eng. 16:016005. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aae4b9

Sharon, R. A., and Murthy, H. A. (2020). Correlation based multi-phasal models for improved imagined speech EEG recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.02195. doi: 10.21437/SMM.2020-5

Si, X., Li, S., Xiang, S., Yu, J., and Ming, D. (2021). Imagined speech increases the hemodynamic response and functional connectivity of the dorsal motor cortex. J. Neural Eng. 18:056048. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ac25d9

Singh, A., and Gumaste, A. (2021). Decoding imagined speech and computer control using brain waves. J. Neurosci. Methods 358:109196. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2021.109196

Song, Y., and Sepulveda, F. (2014). “Classifying speech related vs. idle state towards onset detection in brain-computer interfaces overt, inhibited overt, and covert speech sound production vs. idle state,” in 2014 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS) Proceedings, (Switzerland: IEEE) 568–571. doi: 10.1109/BioCAS.2014.6981789

Stober, S., Sternin, A., Owen, A. M., and Grahn, J. A. (2015). Deep feature learning for EEG recordings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.04306. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1511.04306

Subasi, A. (2007). EEG signal classiﬁcation using wavelet feature extraction and a mixture of expert model. Expert Syst. Appl. 32, 1084–1093. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2006.02.005

Suhaimi, N. S., Mountstephens, J., and Teo, J. (2020). EEG-based emotion recognition: a state-of-the-art review of current trends and opportunities. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2020:8875426. doi: 10.1155/2020/8875426

Tamm, M.-O., Muhammad, Y., and Muhammad, N. (2020). Classiﬁcation of vowels from imagined speech with convolutional neural networks. Computers 9:46. doi: 10.3390/computers9020046

Ten Oever, S., and Sack, A. T. (2015). Oscillatory phase shapes syllable perception. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 15833–15837. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1517519112

Torres-García, A. A., Reyes-García, C. A., and Villase nor-Pineda, L. (2022). “A survey on EEG-based imagined speech classiﬁcation,” in Biosignal Processing and Classiﬁcation Using Computational Learning and Intelligence (Mexico: Elsevier), 251–270. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-820125-1.00025-7

Tøttrup, L., Leerskov, K., Hadsund, J. T., Kamavuako, E. N., Kæseler, R. L., and Jochumsen, M. (2019). “Decoding covert speech for intuitive control of braincomputer interfaces based on single-trial EEG: a feasibility study,” in 2019 IEEE 16th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), (Canada: IEEE) 689–693. doi: 10.1109/ICORR.2019.8779499

Ullah, S., and Halim, Z. (2021). Imagined character recognition through EEG signals using deep convolutional neural network. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 59, 1167–1183. doi: 10.1007/s11517-021-02368-0

Wang, L., Zhang, X., Zhong, X., and Zhang, Y. (2013). Analysis and classiﬁcation of speech imagery EEG for BCI. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 8, 901–908. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2013.07.011

Yger, F., Berar, M., and Lotte, F. (2016). Riemannian approaches in brain-computer interfaces: a review. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 25, 1753–1762. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2016.2627016

Zhang, D., Gong, E., Wu, W., Lin, J., Zhou, W., and Hong, B. (2012). “Spoken sentences decoding based on intracranial high gamma response using dynamic time warping,” in 2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (United States: IEEE), 3292–3295. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346668

Zhang, J., Huang, T., Wang, S., and Liu, Y.-j. (2019). Future internet: trends and challenges. Front. Inform. Technol. Electron. Eng. 20, 1185–1194. doi: 10.1631/FITEE.1800445

Zhang, X., Yao, L., Zhang, S., Kanhere, S., Sheng, M., and Liu, Y. (2018). Internet of things meets brain-computer interface: a uniﬁed deep learning framework for enabling human-thing cognitive interactivity. IEEE Intern. Things J. 6, 2084–2092. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018. 2877786

Zhao, S., and Rudzicz, F. (2015). “Classifying phonological categories in imagined and articulated speech,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (Australia: IEEE), 992–996. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2015.71 78118

Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Copyright © 2022 Lopez-Bernal, Balderas, Ponce and Molina. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

